"","x"
"1","Boris Johnson: (00:00);Good afternoon. I have today left hospital after a week in which the NHS has saved my life. No question. It’s hard to find words to express my debt, but before I come to that, I want to thank everyone in the entire UK for the effort and the sacrifice you have made, and are making. When the sun is out and the kids are at home, when the whole natural world seems that its loveliest and the outdoors is so inviting, I can only imagine how tough it has been to follow the rules on social distancing."
"2","Boris Johnson: (00:40);I thank you because so many millions and millions of people across this country have been doing the right thing. Millions going through the hardship of self isolation faithfully, patiently, and with thought and care others as well as for themselves. I want you to know that this Easter Sunday, I do believe that your efforts are worth it and are daily proving their worth. Because although we mourn every day, those who are taken from us in such numbers and though the struggle is by no means over, we are not making progress in this incredible national battle against coronavirus."
"3","Boris Johnson: (01:25);A fight we never picked against an enemy we still don’t entirely understand. We’re making progress in this national battle because the British public formed a human shield around this country’s greatest national asset, our National Health Service. We understood and we decided that if together we could keep our NHS safe, if we could stop our NHS from being overwhelmed, then we could not be beaten, and this country would rise together and overcome this challenge as we have overcome so many challenges in the past."
"4","Boris Johnson: (02:07);In the last seven days, I have of course seen the pressure that the NHS is under. I’ve seen the personal courage, not just of the doctors and nurses, but of everyone, the cleaners, the cooks, the healthcare workers of every description. Physios, radiographers, pharmacists who kept coming to work, kept putting themselves in harm’s way, kept risking this deadly virus."
"5","Boris Johnson: (02:35);It is thanks to that courage, that devotion, that duty and that love that our NHS has been unbeatable. I want to pay my own thanks to the utterly brilliant doctors, leaders in their fields, men and women, but several of them for some reason called Nick, who took some crucial decisions a few days ago, which I will be grateful for the rest of my life. I want to thank the many nurses, men and women whose care has been so astonishing. I’m going to forget some names, so please forgive me, but I want to thank Po Ling and Shannon and Emily and Angel and Connie and Becky and Rachel and Nikki and Anne. And I hope they won’t mind if I mention in particular two nurses who stood by my bedside for 48 hours when things could have gone either way. They’re Jenny from Zealand Invercargill on the South Island to be exact, and Luis from Portugal near Porto."
"6","Boris Johnson: (03:45);And the reason in the end my body did start to get enough oxygen was because for every second of the night they were watching, and they were thinking and they were caring and making the interventions I needed. So that is how I also know that across this country, 24 hours a day, for every second of every hour, there are hundreds of thousands of NHS staff who are acting with the same care and thought and precision as Jenny and Luis."
"7","Boris Johnson: (04:27);That is why we will defeat this coronavirus and defeat it together. We will win because our NHS is the beating heart of this country. It is the best of this country. It is unconquerable. It is powered by love."
"8","Boris Johnson: (04:50);So thank you from me, from all of us to the NHS. Let’s remember to follow the rules on social distancing. Stay at home, protect our NHS and save lives. Thank you and happy Easter."
"9","Speaker 2: (05:13);Boris Johnson, the prime minister there in that video statement released on Twitter just a short time ago after his week in hospital in which he was in intensive care. Looking remarkably strong there and addressing the nation with those words. Thanking the NHS staff in particular who had stayed by his side, those two nurses who had kept him going with oxygen on that particular night where he felt it could have gone either way, and that they had, in his words, saved his life. No question about that."
"10","Speaker 2: (05:45);So, that was the latest from the prime minister. He’s now been released St. Thomas’s hospital in London. He is going to continue his convalescence checkers after being in Downing Street this afternoon."
"11","Rishi Sunak: (00:00);England. Earlier today, the government’s independent fiscal watchdog, the Office for Budget Responsibility, the OBR published a report into the impact of coronavirus on the economy and public finances. It is important to be clear that the OBR’s numbers are not a forecast or a prediction. They simply set out what one possible scenario might look like, and it may not even be the most likely scenario. But it’s important that we are honest with people about what might be happening in our economy."
"12","Rishi Sunak: (00:35);So before I turn to today’s health figures, I want to spend a few minutes explaining what the OBR have said, and let me thank them for their continued work. There are three brief points I wanted to make. First, the OBR’s figures suggest that the scale of what we are facing will have serious implications for our economy here at home, in common with other countries around the world."
"13","Rishi Sunak: (01:03);These are tough times, and there will be more to come. As I’ve said before, we can’t protect every business and every household, but we came into this crisis with a fundamentally sound economy powered by the hard work and ingenuity of the British people and British businesses. While those economic impacts are significant, the OBR also expect them to be temporary, where they bounce back in growth."
"14","Rishi Sunak: (01:37);The second point I want to make is that we’re not just going to stand by and let this happen. Our planned economic response is protecting millions of jobs, businesses, self employed people, charities, and households. Our response aims to directly support people and businesses while the restrictions are in place, and to make sure that as the restrictions are changed, we can as quickly as possible get people back to work, get businesses moving again, and recover our economy."
"15","Rishi Sunak: (02:11);The OBR today have been clear that the policies we have set out will do that. The OBR today have been clear that if we had not taken the actions we have, the situation would be much worse. In other words, our plan is the right plan."
"16","Rishi Sunak: (02:32);The third point I want to make is this. Right now, the single most important thing we can do for the health of our economy is to protect the health of our people. It’s not a case of choosing between the economy and public health. Common sense tells us that doing so would be self-defeating. At a time when we are seeing hundreds of people dying every day from terrible disease, the absolute priority must be to focus all of our resources, not just of the state but of businesses and all of you at home as well, in a collective national effort to beat this virus. The government’s approach is to follow scientific and medical advice through our step by step action plan, aiming to slow the spread of the virus, so fewer people need hospital treatment at any one time, protecting the NHS’ ability to cope."
"17","Rishi Sunak: (03:32);I said in my budget a month ago that whatever the NHS needs, it will get. And we have honored that promise. Yesterday, we published an update showing that we’ve given our public services an extra 14 and a half billion pounds in recent weeks. We are taking action to increase NHS capacity with more beds, more key staff, and more equipment on the front line. The secretary of state for health and social care will be updating on our plans for social care tomorrow. This is why we are instructing people to stay at home, so that we can protect our NHS and save lives."
"18","Rishi Sunak: (04:17);I can report that through the government’s ongoing monitoring and testing program, as of today, 302,599 people in the U K have now been tested for coronavirus, with 93,873 people testing positive. 19,706 people in the UK have been admitted to hospital with the virus, down from 20,184 people yesterday."
"19","Rishi Sunak: (04:47);Sadly of those in hospital 12,107 people have now died, an increase of 778 fatalities since yesterday. Our thoughts are with the family and friends of all those who have lost their lives."
"20","Rishi Sunak: (05:05);These figures are a powerful reminder to us all of the importance of following the government’s guidance. Stay at home, protect our NHS, and save lives. Thank you. I’ll now hand over to Steve to take you through today’s data in more detail before we take some questions from the media."
"21","Stephen Powis: (05:26);Thank you. Well as you’ve just heard, our main strategy in combating this virus is social distancing. So in other words, stay at home, avoid social contact. By doing that, we can ensure that the spread of the virus, the transmission from one person to another, is reduced, so over time we will start to see a reduction in the number of infections from coronavirus."
"22","Stephen Powis: (05:52);I’m pleased to say that we continue to see evidence, the Great British public are complying with those instructions. You’ve seen this transport chart most days, and you can see that we continue to see much reduced activity in public transport but also in vehicle transport. There are other data that we look at on a regular basis that tell us that compliance levels in the public are very high. We need to keep it that way. We absolutely need to make sure that we keep the benefits of this going forward, and we don’t take a foot off the pedal. We don’t become complacent."
"23","Stephen Powis: (06:33);Now, of course, a reduction in infection rates in the next slide will then translate into a reduction in new UK cases. You can see here our testing has shown a plateauing of the number of new cases we’re picking up. We’re not testing everybody who’s symptomatic in the community, so this data will never be a true complete reflection."
"24","Stephen Powis: (06:58);But I think in the next slide you can see that that in turn will then translate into an effect on the number of people who require a hospital bed. Now as we’ve often said, for the vast majority of individuals, this is a mild illness like a flu-like illness or a bad cold."
"25","Stephen Powis: (07:18);But for an unfortunate minority, this will require hospitalization. But you can see that there’s increasing evidence now that the number of hospital admissions is stabilizing and plateauing. You can see that in London, but you can also see it in other areas, such as the Midlands. This is evidence that is now accumulating that the benefit of that social distancing, of reducing transmission is now beginning to be manifest in a stabilization in hospital admissions."
"26","Stephen Powis: (07:48);Then on the next slide, you will see the number of deaths in the UK. As you’ve heard, that is continuing to rise. This is the number that will reduce last, unfortunately. With sadness, it’s the one that will take longest to change, but those benefits from social distancing will eventually translate into a reduction in the number of daily deaths."
"27","Stephen Powis: (08:15);So, the message is quite clear. We are beginning to see the benefits of the undoubted hardship that we’ve all been asked to go through, in terms of social distancing, in terms of not meeting with friends and family. It’s really important that those benefits are maintained, that we continue to follow the instructions that we’ve all been given. We will then get on top of this virus."
"28","Rishi Sunak: (08:43);Thank you Steve. If we could turn to some questions, think first, Laura Kuenssberg from the BBC."
"29","Laura Kuenssberg: (08:49);Thank you, Chancellor. People are of course devastated by the numbers of people losing their lives, but tonight with warnings of 2 million extra people unemployed, people are also desperately worried about their jobs."
"30","Laura Kuenssberg: (09:01);If you can level with people, do you think we will be feeling the costs of this crisis for a generation? If I could ask the medics, can you, from as soon as you possibly can, start including the numbers of deaths in care homes and in the community in these daily statistics, so people can have a true picture of what’s going on?"
"31","Rishi Sunak: (09:20);Thank you, Laura. I also, when I see these numbers, am deeply troubled. As I’ve I think consistently said when I’ve been at this podium and elsewhere, you know, this is going to be hard. Our economy is going to take a significant hit, and as I’ve said before, that’s not an abstract thing. People are going to feel that in their jobs and in their household incomes."
"32","Rishi Sunak: (09:40);You know, what I would say and what the OBR report I think confirms is that, you know, the measures we’ve put in place can significantly mitigate that impact. In particular, the jobs retention scheme, the furloughing scheme we’ve put in place, aims to do exactly that, ensure that fewer people are unemployed but remain attached to their company through the furlough scheme. Then also as the OBR says, the reason that’s a good thing, not just in the short term, which means when we get through this, we can bounce back as quickly as possible. So, to your point about a generation, no, I very much hope that the measures we’ve put in place will allow us to do exactly as the OBR have said, bounce back. If you look at their scenario that is something that they talk about in there."
"33","Rishi Sunak: (10:22);So, you know, yes it will be difficult in the short term. I’m happy to be honest about that with people. I think the measures we’ve put in place will help, and then as we get through this, it will mean that we can recover quickly and strongly and get our lives and economy back to normal. And I think Yvonne or Steve on the, [crosstalk 00:10:40] on the data."
"34","Yvonne Doyle: (10:41);Thank you, Chancellor. Thank you, Laura. Yes. So, the deaths in out of hospital, we, the Office of National Statistics do actually collect total deaths, and we’ve had a download of that today. But Laura, we are working with the ONS to actually speed that up, so that we do get quicker information."
"35","Yvonne Doyle: (10:58);As you know, the daily deaths we would very much like to have, it’s a bit more complicated for care homes, because although over nine out of 10 deaths sadly do occur still in hospital, in the community there’s a range of places where they occur including in care homes, but not just there. In hospices, and at home, indeed, as well."
"36","Yvonne Doyle: (11:19);In these very dispersed systems, we just need to be absolutely clear that the cause of death that is attributed is correct. That is what takes time on the death certificate to get right. But we would like to have much more rapid data, preferably on a daily basis. And that’s what we’re working towards."
"37","Rishi Sunak: (11:39);Does that cover it, Laura?"
"38","Laura Kuenssberg: (11:41);Can I just come back in on your point? I mean, the numbers you, you hope there will be a temporary [inaudible 00:11:45], but the expansion of the amount of borrowing that the government is going to do and the projections for the deficit do suggest that there will be very longterm consequences for either your government or future governments’ choices."
"39","Laura Kuenssberg: (11:56);Do you really think that we could just shake this off within a few months from the economy?"
"40","Rishi Sunak: (12:01);I think there’s two separate things. You know, one is what happens in the real economy, in terms of business activity, economic growth, and jobs. And there, I do hope the measures we’ve put in place will ensure that we can have a reasonably fast bounce back. That’s why we’re doing what we can. Obviously, that’s a function of when we exit all of these measures."
"41","Rishi Sunak: (12:20);But I think your second point about public finances this year, the OBR is right to say, you know, there will be a significant increase in borrowing. That, you know, we are, we are borrowing a significant amount in order to fund these measures. I think that’s absolutely the right decision. As the OBR have said, I think the cost of not doing that would be far worse than if we did do what we’re doing. So, I think that is the right thing to say."
"42","Rishi Sunak: (12:42);Then, we think about our future public finances. If we get, as the OBR has put in its scenario, a relatively swift bounce back and the economy recovering, actually our public finances on a year to year basis should return to a more normal position. The interventions we’ve put in place are largely temporary and do not need to be repeated on a year by year basis. So hopefully that will allow us-"
"43","Rishi Sunak: (13:03);… to get to a sustainable position in a reasonably soon after we exit. Thank you. The next question is Paul Brand at the ITV. Paul, you there? Brilliant."
"44","Paul Brand: (13:13);Hi. Yeah, good afternoon. I just want to pick up on Laura’s point about data and put that to you as well, Chancellor. We’ve been filming today at a care home in Gateshead where they feel as if the residents they’ve lost to COVID-19 are being forgotten. Given that data does exist, however imperfect it may be, wouldn’t it just be more respectful to include those deaths in your own statistics?"
"45","Rishi Sunak: (13:34);Well, look. Paul, before Yvonne talks about the data, what I tell you from my perspective is I’d say to all those people working in care homes up and down the country, whether it’s the people in them, whether it’s the people looking after them, you’ve absolutely not been forgotten, and there’s an enormous amount of focus, whether it’s at the NHS, whether it’s at Public Health England or elsewhere to make sure that care homes not just get the PPE they need, but they get the testing they need, they get the support they need in every aspect of the job they’re doing, which is extraordinary. When we clap every week, we’re clapping for people everywhere who are caring."
"46","Rishi Sunak: (14:06);In terms of the data, there’s absolutely no desire not to respect what’s happening in care homes and to provide that data. As Yvonne could talk about in a second, we’re actually working with the ONS to speed up the publication of that data. In terms of the data that we publish every day and make decisions on, I think there, there is a question about making sure we have a data set that is consistent and accurate and timely, and I think there is just a logistical challenge in being able to collect that data and then make decisions based on it, but Yvonne can maybe elaborate on that point."
"47","Yvonne Doyle: (14:39);Thank you, Chancellor. So absolutely. I would very much like to have the best possible data on a daily basis, and the care sector is very much seen as part of the health and care family. They are the front line, and we’re very familiar with that sector through our local work and through our national work with local government and with the local response forums, Then local resilience fora. We work on the outbreaks, which is even more important to discuss in a sense than anything else at the moment, where we have a number of outbreaks in care homes, and there is very active input there to ensure that the damage and the harm to people is mitigated. So we work very actively with the care home sector, but it is a very dispersed sector."
"48","Stephen Powis: (15:26);I would also say that the reason that we can provide the data very quickly from hospitals is because there are fewer hospitals compared to care homes, so we’re working with a smaller number of organizations. But because our hospitals are very used to the process of supplying data to NHS England on a regular and even on a daily basis, that is something that they do during normal times for all sorts of data. We in the hospital sector have a have an infrastructural basis to get that data rapidly, and of course the patients that we report from hospitals are those that we know have been tasted as positive. Again, that is different from in the community where doctors are registering deaths based on a probable diagnosis and not necessarily on a tested diagnosis, so there are key differences in the two sets of data and how they are collected."
"49","Rishi Sunak: (16:17);Yeah. Paul, just to put some context around Steve’s point, there are a couple of hundred NHS troughs with an existing consistent system for providing data. There are tens of thousands of social care settings that one needs to collect data from, and that’s the challenge that Steve is talking about. Does that answer your question fully?"
"50","Paul Brand: (16:38);Yeah. Can I just pick up on the data again though, because there has been some discussion the past couple of days that your own slides include data from France, which does include … in France, they do include deaths in care homes in their data, so why would it be fair to put that data on your slide but not care homes in the UK on that side?"
"51","Yvonne Doyle: (16:56);Happy to discuss that. Indeed, different countries report in different ways, and one of the issues that we’ve noticed is sometimes the way those data are presented can cause quite a surprise in the system. Recently, there was quite a large inject of data from care homes in France. It made the data look as if there was an alarming increase in deaths on that day. It wasn’t actually the case. It demonstrates exactly the challenge of getting this right day on day, and we’re very much learning internationally. We’re in touch with all our European neighbors to learn the best we can do."
"52","Stephen Powis: (17:33);I think that the general point is that it’s really important that we compare with other countries, that all countries compare with each other and learn from each other. But of course, there are differences in the reporting of all sorts of statistics from different countries, and it’s really important to ensure that that is taken into account when you are doing that comparison."
"53","Rishi Sunak: (17:55);Thank you, Paul. If we could turn next to Kathryn Samson at STV?"
"54","Kathryn Samson: (18:01);Thank you, Chancellor. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon said at her press conference this afternoon, she wants the assurances that Scottish care workers aren’t going to lose out on PPE because of reports companies have been told to prioritize NHS England. Could you please confirm for me no company has been told to do this by Public Health England? Will you be investigating this further? Basically, is this story rubbish or is it not?"
"55","Rishi Sunak: (18:27);Thank you for the question, Kathryn. I think if you look at what the national clinical director in Scotland said, I think earlier today, he said we’ve looked into it and we do think it’s rubbish. Those were his words, not mine. I would say from our perspective, there’s been incredibly close coordinated action across our public health bodies and NHS bodies to make sure we have a four nation approach to all of this. There’s no truth in those stories that those companies have been told to prioritize PPE equipment, and I think rather the contrary is actually happening. In fact, as Steve and Yvonne will elaborate on a minute, there’s been incredibly close collaboration between our four nations in this regard. But, Yvonne, are you best placed to give some examples of that?"
"56","Yvonne Doyle: (19:11);Thank you, Chancellor. I can assure you that the four chief medical officers and the four medical directors, the nursing directors work very closely on if not a daily, certainly a weekly with that group, and we are very coordinated on what we want. We want to make sure that each country gets what it needs, and that is driven by the intelligence that we get back from each of the devolved administrations. Public Health England has not, in any sense, directed any of the devolved administrations to be at any disadvantage. We work really closely together."
"57","Rishi Sunak: (19:46);Brilliant. Thank you, Kathryn. Can we turn next to Ed Conway from Sky?"
"58","Ed Conway: (19:53);Yeah. Thanks, Chancellor. There’s been quite a lot of talk about how unprecedented the economic impacts of COVID-19 has been, but the scenario that we’ve heard about from the OBR, as you say, it is pretty shocking. It’s the deepest slump since 1709, 2 million people unemployed. The state’s at its biggest size ever. The national data, 100% of GDP. Did all of that shock you? And even if the economy does bounce back we’ll still have higher debt. It will be a bigger state. Are you really suggesting that life will simply return to normal?"
"59","Rishi Sunak: (20:30);Well, Ed, I’d echo what I’ve said before, and you’ve given some numbers there, but I generally don’t believe this is a time for ideology or orthodoxy. This is an unprecedented times, an unprecedented crisis, and that calls for an unprecedented economic response. In that sense, it’s not surprising to see some of these figures, because what we’re dealing with here is unlike anything we’ve seen before, which is why we’ve put in place the measures we have. I do believe that those measures will help mitigate some of the short term impact on our economy and ensure that we can try and keep as much of the productive capacity of our economy, as many businesses connected to their employees as possible during this difficult period, so that when it’s over, and it will be over at some point, then they can reconnect and we can bounce back as an economy as quickly as possible. Indeed, that’s what the OBR scenario puts in its forecast. I do believe that is possible in that sense when you talk about getting back to normal, but I sense you might have a followup on that, so please do ask."
"60","Ed Conway: (21:33);Well, I’m curious just because you’ve talked a lot about hardship, and I’m curious. We’re getting some idea about what hardship means for many people in Britain, for many companies, but I’m also wondering whether the hardship might have to continue after this, if we have such a high level of debt that the UK economy is going to look slightly different than it was only a few months ago."
"61","Rishi Sunak: (22:01);Well, look, once we get through this, obviously we’ll have to take stock of public finances and the economy and make the right decisions at that point. I’ve talked before about doing whatever we need to right the ship at that point, but what I would say is we remain very committed to the agenda that we set out before, which was about leveling up and spreading opportunity around this country. Indeed, I believe that can still be a critical part of how we get back to normal here, right? We’re all in this together as we face this public health crisis. It’s a collective national effort, and when we think about our economic recovery, I think about it as one in which we’re all in together as well, and one where every single part of this country is able to share in the benefits of growth and opportunity and improvements in productivity at that point."
"62","Rishi Sunak: (22:47);Our agenda about spreading opportunity to our regions about leveling up and investing in infrastructure, that will only become I think more important as we exit this crisis. It’s delivering on that, it will actually help right the ship, restore public finances to a sensible place when we come out of this. The OBR talks about the possibility for that, and our job is to deliver on that once we get through this. I hope that’s clear. Is that all right? Thank you, Ed. Perfect. Should we move next to Francis Elliott, The Times?"
"63","Francis Elliott: (23:21);Hi, Chancellor. Yes. Just picking up on Ed’s point there, it’s clear that the economic fallout from this is going to disproportionately hit the young. I’m thinking of particularly people joining the labor market. Looking forward, can you commit to maintaining policies like the triple lock on pensions, for instance? What’s your message to younger people? To the medics, if I could ask, do you have any data on the proportion of new cases which are hospital acquired infections of COVID or acquired in care homes? Are there kind of R rates that are above one in those settings? We understand that they are below one in the community. Could you possibly give us some granularity on the data of hospital acquired infection, please?"
"64","Rishi Sunak: (24:05);Francis, thanks. You’re kind of drawing me into writing future budgets here today, which is probably a difficult thing to do, but to your general point about young people and the role and the part they’ve played in this, I’ll pay enormous tribute to them. Whether it’s very young children who are not able to go to school, take exams, it’s enormously disruptive to them, and they’re trying to operate at the best that they can. While they’re doing it in difficult circumstances, trying to do the best they can. Then all the way up to people in the labor market as you talked about, my message then would be thank you for everything you’re doing. When I see all the reports of people volunteering, young people in their communities who have the time to help out an elderly neighbor with shopping or volunteering on our new NHS app and other systems, that to me is our society coming together, everyone realizing they can play a different role to help us as a country get through this, and that deserves enormous praise."
"65","Rishi Sunak: (25:01);From an economic perspective, whatever age you’re at, our job is to provide opportunity if you, when we come out of this. To me, it doesn’t matter whether you’re young, middle aged or old, whether you live in London or in the countryside in the Southwest, or indeed in the Northeast of England. We want to make sure that there’s economic opportunity for you. That might mean that you want to start your own business, so as we come out of this, I want to look at making sure that this remains one of the best places in the world to start and grow a business, this is the best place to go and study and research the next generation of whether it’s vaccines or indeed anything else that our country is so good at doing to create the next companies of the future. I will look at all of those things and make sure that the plans we had in place before are the right ones. What can we do to turbocharge them even further, because if you’re young and entering the labor market, I want you to look forward and see opportunity and hope for your future, and I’m confident that we will be able to deliver that as we exit this crisis. [crosstalk 00:12:59], Steve?"
"66","Stephen Powis: (25:58);Should I say something about hospital acquired infections? Yvonne might want to comment too, and Yvonne might want to say something about …"
"67","Stephen Powis: (26:03);… care home infections."
"68","Stephen Powis: (26:06);So the first thing I’d say is we take hospital-acquired infections very seriously. We do in normal times, and we absolutely do now. Now, we have a very strong record in the UK of managing hospital-acquired infections."
"69","Stephen Powis: (26:20);One example of that would be MRSA blood infections. When I was a young doctor, they occurred relatively frequently. Due to a huge amount of work on that particular hospital-acquired infection, it now happens rarely. So we have very strong infection prevention and control systems within our hospitals. So we are in a good place going into this epidemic."
"70","Stephen Powis: (26:42);Having said that, clearly this is a new virus. It’s one that we are still learning about in terms of how it’s transmitted, in terms of its infection rates. Of course, we are seeing much more of it, because it is coming into a population that is not immune, than we would for other infections. So it’s not unexpected that we will see some hospital-acquired infections relating to coronavirus."
"71","Stephen Powis: (27:04);We’re really looking at that very carefully. We want to ensure that where we do see it, we get on top of it very quickly. Our hospitals are separating out coronavirus patients from other patients. They’re cohorting, they’re using all the standard infection prevention and control methods that they use to manage infections. But we do need to make sure that we learn from this new virus, and if we need to adapt our infection prevention and control policies to manage it differently, then we should do that. So it’s something that we are actively looking at at the moment."
"72","Stephen Powis: (27:37);I can’t give you that R number that you asked for because don’t know what that is. But the message is that we take hospital-acquired infections very seriously, and we will continue to look at this and ensure that we adapt our policies within hospitals to take account of what we’ve learned about this new virus and how we should manage it."
"73","Stephen Powis: (27:58);Yvonne?"
"74","Yvonne Doyle: (27:59);Yes, thank you, Steve. Equally, we are very much cognizant of what is happening in care homes. Each day, we get information from our local teams working with directors of public health and the local resilience for about what is going on in terms of this infection in care homes. It doesn’t distinguish. It will pick the vulnerable. Of course, they will not be immune either. Those situations, we call them, but actually sometimes [inaudible 00:28:28] outbreaks as well, local teams with our support and guidance will be in there providing advice, doing testing, and arranging for the mitigation of harm to those vulnerable people."
"75","Yvonne Doyle: (28:40);Bear in mind, it’s a very challenging group, because many of these residents may have dementia. It’s important that it is a humane response as well. So this is a different challenge to hospitals but of equal concern."
"76","Stephen Powis: (28:57);And on that R number in hospitals, when I said I know what it is, let me be clear, it’s because the data is not clear enough for us to get a good sight of what it is at the moment. But that work will be ongoing as part of our look at healthcare-associated infections."
"77","Rishi Sunak: (29:14);Francis, that answer is comprehensively as they can, hopefully."
"78","Francis: (29:18);Well, look, just to be absolutely clear, so there is no number of hospital-acquired infections?"
"79","Stephen Powis: (29:26);So the data is being looked at at the moment. I think you specifically asked about the R number, which is infection rate. The data is not clear enough yet to be able to give that number or to calculate that number."
"80","Rishi Sunak: (29:40);Thank you, Francis. Turn next to Tom Newton Dunn at The Sun."
"81","Tom Newton Dunn: (29:46);Chancellor, thank you very much. A question on the furlough schemes, loans and grants that you’re supervising. There’s been a lot of complaint from sectors like the British Chamber of Commerce and others that although welcome, it’s just simply not happening fast enough. Money’s not getting out the door fast enough. Payday for a lot of companies is coming up on April the 25th, after which a lot of companies simply won’t survive unless they have that money in time. So can you give a guarantee today that your furlough money, the portal will be open by April the 25th and money will start to leave the treasury to these companies by that April the 25th?"
"82","Tom Newton Dunn: (30:27);And a quick question to Yvonne and Steve. Going back to the France-UK comparison on the the daily mortality figures, it is simply unfair to compare them, to put those figures on the same chart, is it not? Because effectively, you’re comparing apples with pears, one with care home deaths, one without. Do you accept that if you just compare hospital deaths between France and the UK, the UK would be above the French line for some time now?"
"83","Rishi Sunak: (30:59);Thanks, Tom. You mentioned three different schemes, and you’re absolutely right to do that, and do keep pushing, because we need to make sure that the interventions we’re putting in place reach the people that they’re designed to help."
"84","Rishi Sunak: (31:10);In terms of the grants to small businesses, that money has obviously left central government and gone to local government who are administering those grant schemes. I think the last numbers I saw showed that about a third of it had already been dispersed to businesses at three to four billion pounds, but there’s still obviously more to go. I spoke to the local government Secretary of State today about that, and he’s intensifying his efforts and scrutiny to make sure we can get that money out the door as fast as possible."
"85","Rishi Sunak: (31:38);In terms of the loans, I think there’s been enormous improvement from where we were at the end of the week before last, where there were about a thousand loans that had been issued. That number is now up I think four times to the end of last week. The amount, in terms of millions of pounds that have gone out the door, is up I think five times. The changes that we made I think are making a difference."
"86","Rishi Sunak: (31:58);I’m grateful to all the bank staff, who I know many at the large banks have worked over the Easter weekend to help work through the backlog of applications that they had. So thank you to all of them for doing that, which I think will mean that we see an acceleration in those numbers in the coming days as well. But we’re keeping a careful eye on that as you would imagine, and I’m in close contact with the bank CEOs."
"87","Rishi Sunak: (32:20);Then lastly on the furlough scheme, what we said when I announced this scheme was, to reiterate, we’ve never had something like this in the UK before. As you’ve seen from the OBR report today, it potentially might cover millions of people, and we had to build a brand new system from scratch to handle that. That is what is dictating the timing."
"88","Rishi Sunak: (32:44);The team have been working night and day since the announcement to get this up and running. I’ve always said that the scheme would be up and running by the end of April. That’s our intention. Where we are at the moment is we are on track to deliver that. The system is built, we’re in the process of testing that out with small groups of employers at the moment. It will open is the plan on the 20th of April, is the working assumption, that it will open on the 20th of April for applications. Then there is a period of several days between submitting an application and receiving cash."
"89","Rishi Sunak: (33:17);That’s comprised of two chunks. One is our desire and need to do some fraud checks, as you would rightly expect, because we need to make sure that the taxpayer is protected against fraudulent claims. That takes us a little bit of time to do. Then the remainder of the time is the back system in order to get the money back to people. But the [inaudible 00:33:37] portal should be open on or around the 20th. Then from there, there’s a period of days, several days, to get the cash. But you should be able to get the cash before the end of the month if everything goes to plan."
"90","Rishi Sunak: (33:48);Then Steve, did you want to pick up or was it Yvonne?"
"91","Stephen Powis: (33:49);Yvonne, did you want …"
"92","Yvonne Doyle: (33:53);Well, I can start. So yes, I completely understand the point about comparing like with like, and there are so many measures now even of death, which you might imagine is a fairly straightforward measure. It can be very difficult to understand what exactly you’re looking at, and one of the things we’re doing all the time is speaking to our European neighbors to understand not just what they’re measuring, but what they consider best practice to be and how we can learn together about that."
"93","Yvonne Doyle: (34:19);In the early stages of this epidemic, it was clear that even for death, we were looking at very different denominator populations. So even there, we weren’t actually able to compare like with like, because it was a much younger population that had been tested."
"94","Yvonne Doyle: (34:35);So it would be ideal if we were absolutely clear we were comparing like with like, and that’s what we endeavor to do. But we are always open for learning on that."
"95","Rishi Sunak: (34:45);Perfect. Tom, I think covers everything. Right?"
"96","Tom Newton Dunn: (34:49);Quick followup,-"
"97","Rishi Sunak: (34:51);Go on."
"98","Tom Newton Dunn: (34:51);… if you don’t mind. The loan guarantee scheme is … Certainly also a lot of criticism from people who say, “You should be taking 100% of the risk, certainly for the smaller companies, for loans under 250,000 pounds.” One of your predecessors, George Osborne, has said today you should do that. Will you think about doing it?"
"99","Rishi Sunak: (35:10);Yeah. When people say I should take 100% of the risk, it’s not really me. It’s actually all of us. Right? So taxpayer taking 100% of the risk of the loans defaulting and removing at that point any credit check that the bank might do. So having said that, is there an argument for looking at something like that? Of course there is. There’s systems like that that are in place in Switzerland and in Germany. Germany have just put a system in place right at the end of last week that they got approval to do. We continually look at everything that other countries are doing to see if there are things we can learn and improve from."
"100","Rishi Sunak: (35:46);What I would say is there’s first, there’s an economic and fiscal question as to whether it would be the right intervention for us. We are also doing a lot of direct cash support to businesses through the grants that you asked about. I mentioned 10,000, 25,000 pound cash grants. We’ve also done huge business rates tax cuts in the tens of billions of pounds. Those collectively are quite significant. Not every country has replicated those direct cash help to businesses.2 But as I said, we continue to keep everything under review and look at everything to see where improvements might be made."
"101","Rishi Sunak: (36:18);I think the last thing, sorry, to add on on that is as you asked before about the furlough scheme, we have to be confident that whatever we come up with is actually deliverable. Some of the countries that have put these things in place elsewhere have historic systems that are able to deliver them. That is not the case in this country. We have not done things like this before, which means we don’t have the capability and the systems to deliver something necessarily just because you see it in another country."
"102","Rishi Sunak: (36:48);I think on loans in particular, whether it’s the US, whether it’s France, whether it’s actually Germany as well, in all their domestic press and media and business organizations, you have seen frustration with the pace of the loan programs, because all of these countries like us are doing things that they haven’t done before. There’s a genuine just delivery question about that."
"103","Rishi Sunak: (37:08);Thanks very much. Can we turn next to Dan O’Donoghue from the Press & Journal?"
"104","Dan O’Donoghue: (37:14);Hi, Chancellor. [inaudible 00:37:19] already been said this afternoon. There are warnings that unemployment would soar by more than 2 million due to the coronavirus crisis. Given all the problems [inaudible 00:11:30], and if not, are you open to proposals such as universal basic income? I have [inaudible 00:37:34] quick one to the medics as well. [inaudible 00:37:47] intensive care [inaudible 00:37:52] reports suggest there are just 19 patients currently at NHS Nightingale in London but hundreds of dying in care homes [inaudible 00:38:08]"
"105","Rishi Sunak: (38:11);I think we’ll try and get Dan back, but if I can answer the first part of his question, which I think was … Dan, are you there? We’re struggling to hear you. Why don’t we try and move on, and if we can get Dan back, we can. Yeah, fine. Brilliant. Turning next to Emilio from Politico."
"106","Emilio: (38:41);I’ve got two questions, one for the Chancellor. So we’ve had an idea today of how bad the economic hit from the coronavirus could be, and the Treasury’s already committed obviously eye-watering sums to supporting the country through it. You said you don’t want to write a budget now, but can you just give us a rough sense of how you’re thinking that we might pay for it? Will there be tax rises? Could there be tweaks to the triple locks that our pensioners-"
"107","Emilio: (39:03);… help pay? Could that be maybe another decade of austerity for public services? Can you just give an idea of where you think that money’s going to come from? How will you right the ship? And one question for the medics. You’ve been guided by the science in making the decisions so far, but now of course we’ve got the benefit of hindsight for at least some of this. So can each one of you maybe name the one thing that you wish we’d done differently. So maybe locking down the country earlier, getting testing going earlier, joining the EU ventilator scheme, something like that. Is there anything at all you wish we’d done differently with the benefit of hindsight? Or do you think the UK response has been without fault so far?"
"108","Rishi Sunak: (39:42);Thanks [Emilio 00:39:43]. Look, I’m just not able to talk about future tax policy here. What I would say, the economic priority now is to make sure that we can mitigate as much of the impact that the health interventions are causing. I think the sums that we’ve committed are worthwhile in that regard as the OBR report talks about, it would be far worse if we weren’t doing what we were doing. So I do believe that is the right decision."
"109","Rishi Sunak: (40:09);In terms of when we come out of this, in terms of righting the ship, we’ll have to look at it then. As you’re right to point out, obviously this has cost a lot, but as I said before, the best way out of this for all of us is to just grow the economy, which is why trying to keep as much of it intact as possible at this moment, allows that bounce back when we come out of it and allows us to hopefully snap back to normal as quickly as possible."
"110","Rishi Sunak: (40:32);That’s clearly the most preferable thing. If that happens, it means the longterm impact on public finances, for example, will obviously be reduced, the interventions [inaudible 00:40:42] are temporary, the quicker we get back to normal, the quicker we get back to a sustainable set of public finances. So that’s very much the priority right now. Then, [Yvonne 00:40:50], do you want to go first?"
"111","Yvonne Doyle: (40:53);Yeah. So it’s a very good question and I’m sure it will be asked many times. To me, it seems as if my colleagues and I have been working since at least mid January, seven days a week, sometimes all night in our labs. We have learned so much that I wish I had known in January because undoubtedly we perhaps could have done things differently. But we have just worked tirelessly month in, month out and it’s been a privilege to do so."
"112","Yvonne Doyle: (41:24);One of the great questions for me is when was this virus first around? If I had known that, I think it would have been a wonderful public health gift to have been able to perhaps anticipate what it would do. That’s one of the good scientific questions. But it’s not meaning that we have nothing to learn. We have so much to learn. But I can assure you we are working so hard that every day, what we do, we do in all sincerity for the benefit of the population. Yes, of course we could do things better and that’s why we keep talking to our neighbors actually so that we can learn that. So I’m very humble about it, but there is so much to say about this."
"113","Stephen Powis: (42:06);So it’s a great question, and I spent my medical career as a doctor always looking back on cases I’ve managed, circumstances I’ve been in, asking what could we have done better? I think doctors and other clinicians are very self critical. But one thing I’ve learned is that you can come to those conclusions too early, and you have to wait until you’ve got to the appropriate time to look back and learn the right lessons, and do the right analysis because at the moment we are still very much at the early stages of this. I think the answer to your question will likely be different when we get towards the end of this than it will be now. So I think it’s too early to jump to those sorts of conclusions, but I’m absolutely confident that we will all want to look back and say, what could we have done differently? What could we have done in this way? What could we have done perhaps in another way?"
"114","Rishi Sunak: (43:01);Thank you, Steve. I mean, if I might just add on that, we’re all dealing, whether it’s politicians, whether it’s medical advisors, doctors, we’re all dealing with something that no one’s ever really faced before, and we’re not alone in that. Every country around the world is in the same situation. So when you’re faced with such an unprecedented challenge, are we are going to be absolutely perfect in every single thing we do at the pace we’re having to do it? No, of course not."
"115","Rishi Sunak: (43:27);But what you’ve heard and I would echo from our end, is constantly being driven to do what we think is in the best interest of the country and people and keeping them safe, and where we can learn, adjust, or iterate whether it’s on what I’m doing on economic interventions and loan schemes and whether it’s on what Yvonne and Steve are responsible for, constantly being open to hearing what can be improved, what can be better, responding to feedback and changing things where we need to is absolutely the approach I think all of us collectively take as we try and get the country and the economy through this. Thanks very much and I think we might have Dan back."
"116","Dan: (44:05);Yeah, I’ll try again. Chancellor, as has already been said this afternoon, unemployment could soar by more than 2 million due to the coronavirus crisis. Given all the problems prior to the outbreak with Universal Credits, is US really an adequate safety net? And if not, are you open to proposals such as universal basic income. Could I also just ask quickly to the medics, it keeps being said how the UK won’t exceed intensive care capacity, reports suggest there are just 19 patients NHS Nightingale in London, but hundreds are dying at care homes and at home. Why aren’t they being taken into hospital if there’s room for them?"
"117","Rishi Sunak: (44:45);Dan, thanks for your question. Look, I don’t think universal basic income is the right response to this. I think Universal Credit is working well. Obviously, your DWP staff are under strain, like many other organizations across the country because they’re dealing with people being sick in a way as well. But I think given the circumstances, they are processing claims efficiently and effectively. We’ve provided some extra resource to DWP to help them with that, but I think their staff do deserve praise for what they’re doing."
"118","Rishi Sunak: (45:17);We’ve also injected extra resources to deal with the particular nature of this crisis into the welfare system, whether that’s a strengthening Universal Credit, temporary for this year, working tax credits, or indeed local housing allowance, the local council tax support. All of those interventions, which will total several billion pounds because of the unprecedented nature of what we’re facing, will go to supporting the most vulnerable people in our country. I do believe all of those things are getting to the people that they need to. Yvonne, did you want to?"
"119","Yvonne Doyle: (45:49);Just a quick comment. I think this is a really important question because it brings forward the answer that nobody who needs the NHS care in an emergency should be denied that. I think that’s the message that Steve would want to convey as well. The NHS is there for people. What we do need to understand is the death … much more analysis and understanding of the deaths as they occur, and that is being done regularly. So there may be very good reasons why people from care homes are not being admitted to hospital, I can’t answer that here. But what I do want to make clear is that at no time has it been said to me anywhere that the NHS would not accept a patient who needed to be admitted."
"120","Stephen Powis: (46:35);Yes. So I think that’s absolutely right. In normal times when we’re not dealing with a global pandemic, doctors and other clinicians make difficult decisions with families and patients on a daily basis as to who might get admitted to hospital when there’s a serious illness, perhaps somebody in a care home, who might be admitted to ITU in terms of the benefit of ITU treatment. So those decisions and discussions are made and had day in day out in the NHS, and it should be exactly the same now."
"121","Stephen Powis: (47:06);So one of the purposes of ensuring that the NHS capacity always stays ahead, not just in the ITU beds, but actually in the general beds on the ward as well, has being to allow clinicians to continue to have those discussions and make those decisions in the way that they always do make those decisions. The chief nursing officer, and myself, have been very clear and in fact we’ve written on do not resuscitate orders that we should be dealing with that as a clinical body exactly the same way as we always have done. The fact that we have got the additional capacity in, that we planned so well to get that additional capacity, should mean that clinicians should be confident that they can have those discussions as they always have done in the current epidemic."
"122","Rishi Sunak: (47:55);Thank you. Dan. I think we had one followup that I may have missed so apologies. Emilio, hi."
"123","Emilio: (48:03);Hi, sorry. I put the mic away. Just a quick one on the economic impact, it’s a bit of a cheeky follow up, but obviously one thing that could make the economic situation worse is a no-deal Brexit, so why is the government willing to put the country through that on top of what is currently already going to be suffering through coronavirus?"
"124","Rishi Sunak: (48:21);Thanks Emilio. I mean you talk about no-deal. I mean the reality is we’ve left the European Union, and we’ve left it with a deal that was negotiated. With regard to our future relationship, obviously that’s something that currently those talks are underway. We remain very committed to the timeline that we’ve set out to conclude those by the end of this year. What I can say is, David Frost, our chief negotiator on behalf of the prime minister, was in touch with his deputy counterpart last week and with Michel Barnier his direct counterpart this week to make sure that we have a timeline in place for this phase of the negotiations, which obviously can happen over video conferences and texts and legal agreements are being exchanged between the EU and ourselves. So I’m I’m confident that that work can continue and hopefully reach a satisfactory conclusion, but we remain committed to the timeline that we’ve set out. Thank you Emilio."
"125","Rishi Sunak: (49:18);I think that brings today’s press conference to collusion. Thank you Yvonne. Thank you Steve, and to everyone at home. Thank you for complying with the social distancing guidelines and rules over what was a very sunny bank holiday weekend. I know it’s difficult for all of us in our different ways to get through this, but we are getting through it. We’re getting through it together and we can look forward to happier times. But in the meantime, please do stay at home, protect the NHS and save lives. Thank you."
"126","Matt Hancock: (00:01);Thanks Jess. Good afternoon and welcome back to Downing Street for today’s daily Coronavirus briefing. I’m joined today by Dr. Yvonne Doyle, medical director at Public Health England and before I outline the latest on Coronavirus and the work that we’re doing as a government to tackle it, I wanted briefly to update you about the prime minister’s condition. It’s great news that the prime minister has been discharged from hospital and is now continuing his recovery at Chequers. I hope everyone has seen his message of love and thanks to all those who’ve supported his recovery and to the NHS colleagues who’ve cared for him so brilliantly at St. Thomas’ Hospital. I know that they have cared for him as they would care for anybody in this country and it’s one of the things that makes me so proud that the NHS is there for us all and can give its very best to every single person and has been able to throughout this crisis."
"127","Matt Hancock: (01:11);I know that all of his thoughts are with those affected by this illness and of course the government is working constantly through our Coronavirus Action Plan and the aim is to protect life and to protect the NHS both by slowing the spread of the virus to flatten the curve and by ensuring that the NHS is always there for you and always has more than enough capacity to meet the demands that are placed on it. Today marks a somber day in the impact of this disease as we join the list of countries who have seen more than 10,000 deaths related to Coronavirus. The fact that over 10,000 people have now lost their lives to this invisible killer demonstrates just how serious Coronavirus is and why the national effort that everyone is engaged in is so important. According to the most recent figures, 282,374 people have now been tested for Coronavirus, 84,279 have tested positive."
"128","Matt Hancock: (02:26);Across Great Britain, the number of people admitted to hospital with Coronavirus symptoms is now 19,945 and of those who’ve contracted the virus, 10,612 have tragically died. Our sincere condolences are with all of them, with their families, their friends, their grief is our grief and their stories will not be forgotten. On Friday, I said that staying at this Easter weekend would be a major test of the nation’s resolve and I’m pleased to say that the nation is rising to this challenge. I know that for some people this has been extra tough. If you’re at home with the children, if you can’t visit relatives because they’re shielding, if you’re unable to go to church on this most important day for Christians, your steadfast commitment to following the social distancing rules is making a difference. Thank you for the part that you are playing in helping to protect lives at this critical time in our nation’s history."
"129","Matt Hancock: (03:46);But we cannot be complacent, not when there’s so much at stake. So please keep going. Stay home, protect the NHS and save lives. Today, I want to provide an update on the work we’re doing to slow the spread of the virus and to build capacity. The latest figures show that in Great Britain we have 2,295 spare critical-care beds up 150 from yesterday. So, throughout this crisis, with all the challenges that we’ve been dealing with, all the operational difficulties and all of the logistics, we have always been able to provide the very best of care to everybody who needs it through the NHS. At the start of this crisis, people said that the NHS would be overwhelmed and we’ve seen that and we’ve seen the risk of that elsewhere, but not here. And that is because of the action that a huge number of people have taken, the incredible work of so many. There is more spare capacity now for critical care than there was when Coronavirus first hit our shores. And this is before the Nightingale Hospitals come on stream, London’s opened and we’re already in the process of building six more around England."
"130","Matt Hancock: (05:09);This critical expansion is partly because we have a record number of ventilators, 9,775 and partly because we have record numbers of returners coming back and rejoining the NHS. Over 5,000 former staff are now back on the NHS front line and over 36,000 have come forward to enlist. And this bolstered capacity has been backed by substantial financial support. As the chancellor has said, whatever our NHS and vital public services need during this time, they will have. But of course there’s always more that must be done. So we’re increasing the amount of PPE and I’m glad to say that there are now record amounts in the system and we need the right amounts of medicine too. And I can assure everyone that we’re working very closely with the pharmaceutical supply chain and hospital pharmacies so that the right medicines are there to treat people. And I’m glad to see the reassurances that have been provided today that everybody can have the medicines they need in order to get the care that they need."
"131","Matt Hancock: (06:25);And when we debate the operational challenges we face, I want to be transparent about every single one. Let us not forget that the core measure of NHS capacity, which is what matters to you when you or one of your loved ones needs it, is whether you can get the best care if you catch Coronavirus. On that we are succeeding and in fact succeeding more with each passing day. I also wanted to provide a brief update on this work on personal protective equipment, which is so important for NHS social care staff. I pay tribute to our health and care staff who this weekend, just like every weekend or giving the very best possible care. On Thursday on streets, front doors and balconies up and down the country, we’ve seen the esteem with which the whole nation holds our carers, the people who make the NHS and social care what it is and we owe it to them to get them the equipment that they need."
"132","Matt Hancock: (07:21);On Friday we published a comprehensive PPE plan, which is based on everyone using the right PPE according to the agreed guidelines and daily we’re delivering millions of items to the front line. Now I know that there’ve been questions also about gowns. In the last two days, 121,000 gowns have been delivered around the country and more are going out today and in the week to come. So we’re working very hard to resolve all of these individual logistical challenges. It’s worth saying that the average time for dealing with PPE queries has gone down from six days in March to an average of two and a half days over the past week. And since we published the plan last week, I’m delighted that the sheer number of businesses that have come forward to help with our PPE effort even over the bank holiday weekend."
"133","Matt Hancock: (08:11);Thank you to all of you and to all those who are involved in this enormous herculean effort on PPE and I know that we’ll see many more businesses coming forward and I look forward to it. Testing of course has a huge role in our response and we have discussed repeatedly testing at these press conferences. I’m pleased to say that 42,812 NHS and social care staff and their families have now been tested. And as we ramp up our ability to test in large numbers, we also need to make sure we have the ability to trace contacts just as effectively. And so today I wanted to outline the next step, a new NHS app for contact tracing. If you become unwell with the symptoms of Coronavirus, you can securely tell this new NHS app and the app will then-"
"134","Matt Hancock: (09:03);New NHS app and the app will then send an alert anonymously to other app users that you’ve been in significant contact with over the past few days even before you had symptoms, so that they know and can act accordingly. All data will be handled according to the highest ethical and security standards and would only be used for NHS care and research and we won’t hold it any longer than it’s needed. And as part of our commitment to transparency, we’ll be publishing the source code too. We’re already testing this app and as we do this, we’re working closely with the world’s leading tech companies and renowned experts in clinical safety and digital ethics so that we can get this right. I want to thank all of these world-leading experts who’ve been involved. The more people who get involved, then the better informed our response to Coronavirus will be and the better we can protect the NHS. Her Majesty The Queen spoke for all of us as she so often does when she said that Easter is not canceled and that we need it now more than ever. This is an uncertain Easter for so many people. At a time when we normally come physically together, we must stay apart. It runs counter to every human instinct and every intuition that we possess but we must persevere. Because if we follow the rules and slow the spread of the virus, then each new day will bring us closer to normal life. And we can enjoy Easters to come, safe in the knowledge that when it mattered, we did our bit and rose to the challenge. And we put our loved ones, we put our NHS staff, and we put our local communities first. So please, this Easter, stay home, protect the NHS and save lives. I’m now going to hand over to Yvonne to take us through the charts and the information."
"135","Yvonne Doyle: (11:07);Thank you, Secretary of State. We have four charts to show today. And the first one is on the use of transport. And on this slide you can see that all forms of transport have reduced greatly, particularly rail and tube, but also motor vehicles have declined recently as well. Thank you. Could I have the next slide? This slide tells us about the new UK cases and we can see here on the 12th of April that we have had four and a half thousand cases done through our NHS and public health England offer of testing."
"136","Yvonne Doyle: (11:49);And now coming on stream increasingly is the drive-through testing of key workers and the NHS stuff. And that is bringing us in now at 838 yesterday, and today, at 838, so an increasing enhancement of the testing capacity. And then on the next slide we can see the slide about people in hospital beds with COVID-19 and here we can see the trend has been increasing for London, but now we’re beginning to see London stabilizing, dipping, rising, dipping again, so probably a more stable pattern for London."
"137","Yvonne Doyle: (12:34);But on the other hand, for Great Britain, we do see other regions now beginning to increase, particularly the Northwest and the Yorkshire area as well and the Northeast. So it is very important that the message about staying at home and social distancing is adhered to because we are certainly not past this virus damage yet. And then finally on the final slide we have the global death comparisons and here we can see where the UK is. It’s somewhere in the middle. It’s tracking France. It’s looking close to the Italian trend at the moment. But this is still early days, we would stress, in understanding deaths and we can see where other countries have higher increases in their deaths at the moment. So those are our four slides. Thank you very much."
"138","Matt Hancock: (13:29);Thanks very much indeed, Yvonne. And if we go to the BBC, we’ve got David Shukman."
"139","David Shukman: (13:36);Health Secretary, thank you very much indeed. If I may ask about on this day that we passed this very somber milestone, as you put it, of 10,000 deaths, what is your reaction to the comments of one of your own advisors, Sir Jeremy Ferrar, a renowned international expert on infectious diseases, that the UK may be on course for the worst outcome in terms of death toll in Europe."
"140","Matt Hancock: (14:03);Well, I think that that sort of comment merely reinforces the importance of the central message, which is that people should stay at home because that protects the NHS and saves lives. We get advice from all sorts of experts and we take it all very seriously and we assess it throughout. Now the future of this virus is unknowable as yet because it depends on the behavior of millions of people and the Great British public."
"141","Matt Hancock: (14:40);The good news is that so far we have managed to start to see a flattening of the curve because people are following the social distancing measures by and large. And also that the core goal of making sure that NHS capacity is always above the demand for NHS services has been achieved. So I think especially at moments like this, when we have reached this terrible marker, we are thankfully in a position where we are able to support everybody who needs it in the NHS. And we’re able to see the curve starting to come down. Yvonne, I don’t know. On the international comparisons, of course different countries are different size so you need to make sure you get the statistics right in that."
"142","Yvonne Doyle: (15:35);Absolutely. And could I say, every one of these 10,000 and more deaths is an absolute tragedy from a virus we didn’t know about some time ago. But when you get down to the statistics, it does depend on how people measure this. There are time lags in the deaths. And I would stress particularly it is early days because patterns that we saw perhaps in countries earlier in this may change and we’re beginning to see that internationally."
"143","Matt Hancock: (16:04);Thanks very much, David, unless you want to follow up."
"144","David Shukman: (16:07);Yes, if I could ask you about PPE. At the briefing given yesterday with your colleague, the Home Secretary, I asked whether it was possible for her on behalf of the government to give a commitment to a date by when deliveries of PPE would match what’s needed on the front line. Because every day we get messages from health care workers and others saying they simply don’t have what’s needed."
"145","Matt Hancock: (16:33);The answer is that it’s impossible because the quest is to get the right PPE to the right people on the front line at the right time, across many millions of people across the NHS and social care. And I’m glad to say that that effort is moving in the right direction. We now have records amounts of PPE that’s been put out into the system, but until everybody gets the PPE that they need, then we won’t rest. We have thousands of people working 24/7 on this, including over this bank holiday weekend because the need and the demand for PPE doesn’t stop either."
"146","Matt Hancock: (17:19);So it’s an enormous effort and I want to actually go out of my way to thank the procurement experts that we’ve got in the system. They don’t often get thanks, the procurement experts, because they’re not on the front line, but by God do we need them to make sure that we can get all that PPE. And as I mentioned with gowns, which is currently the item that’s most in need, that we’ve been making some progress over the weekend with more to come next week. Thanks, David. I’ve got Martha Farley from ITV."
"147","Martha Farley: (17:55);Thank you, Health Secretary. A question to you if I may. The Royal College of Nursing has issued new guidance to its members, telling them that if they haven’t been given."
"148","Martha Farley: (18:03);… to its members, telling them that if they haven’t been given the appropriate PPE and that there’s no other way of treating a patient without reducing risk, then they should refuse to work rather than compromising their own safety. Will you apologize to the nurses and indeed the other medical and health care workers who are being put in that impossible position of having to make a decision between whether to offer treatment to a patient or to protect their own personal safety?"
"149","Matt Hancock: (18:29);Well, Martha, as I said in the previous answer, we’re working night and day to make sure that we get the right PPE. And actually, the thing I want to do is pay tribute to the unbelievable efforts of a huge number of people to get to the position where we are in now, which as I said in my opening remarks, is improving, but we won’t rest until we get there. So I work closely with the Royal College of Nursing on these matters and on other things. In fact, I was in contact with them only earlier today because it’s so important that we get this right. Nick Martin from Sky."
"150","Nick Martin: (19:12);Very good afternoon. A question first to the Secretary of State and then Yvonne Doyle, if I may. Secretary of State, you paint a relatively positive picture of where we are at the moment, but there is a very different picture being painted within our care and nursing homes."
"151","Nick Martin: (19:33);I spent a full day in a nursing home the other day, which a full floor had been devoted to elderly patients suffering from coronavirus, and I witnessed flimsy PPE, overstretched staff, a lot of illness, and unfortunately some death of some of the residents."
"152","Nick Martin: (19:54);And what’s been coming back from what I witnessed from the care sector is that they are crying out for tests. Homeowners have been telling me that they’re not getting regular tests for staff and residents, but crucially for those being transferred from hospitals, to the care sector and that they are operating in the dark."
"153","Nick Martin: (20:16);And I’ll tell you if my inbox is anything to go by today, the care sector is watching this right now and is desperate for you to tell them that they will get regular tests so they can end this lottery. Can you give that guarantee to them?"
"154","Matt Hancock: (20:30);Yes I can, Nick. That is coming. And last week we were able to open up testing to staff in care homes, and throughout this there’s been the availability of testing on a clinical basis within care homes, as you mentioned. And this is an area of incredibly high importance because, precisely as you’ve seen, some of the most vulnerable people live in care homes and especially in nursing homes."
"155","Matt Hancock: (20:59);And therefore, getting this right is just, is so important. So I think one of the things that we’ve succeeded in doing as a country during this crisis is recognizing that our care staff are on the front line just as much as our NHS staff are, and making sure that we expand that testing capability both to staff and to residents, including this very difficult issue of patients leaving hospital. We are addressing that and I think that the issues that you raise are incredibly important. Thank you. And John Stevens from The Mail."
"156","Nick Martin: (21:38);Can I just follow that question up?"
"157","Matt Hancock: (21:39);Yes, of course. John, if you don’t mind, we’ll go back to Nick."
"158","Nick Martin: (21:42);The care operators are telling me that they need this now or tomorrow. What’s the timescale that you can arrange for regular widespread tests to get into care homes? How long will they have to wait for these tests?"
"159","Matt Hancock: (21:58);Yes, so for the staff, as I said, we have made that change already at the end of last week, and I announced it on Friday. And therefore, we’re rolling that out right now. And for the residents, the testing’s been available throughout, but we also, we always constantly keep under review the protocols for the transfer of people between hospitals and social care, which is a very nuanced and complicated area, where the most important thing is that the interests of the patient are put first. Yvonne, did you want to add anything on that?"
"160","Yvonne: (22:39);I think Nick might have had a question. Nick?"
"161","Nick Martin: (22:42);… speak now. Are you satisfied that care homes have enough support?"
"162","Matt Hancock: (22:47);Well, I’m constantly trying to get more support to them is the honest truth, and of course making sure, for instance, that the testing is available. I was very glad that we were able to roll that out to testing staff and you’ll have seen the sharp increase in the number of tests that are available."
"163","Yvonne: (23:05);Happy to add to that, I think. I think you might’ve had a question, but let me say this is very much on our radar as well. We’re very aware through our local health protection teams and our connections with our local directors of public health and through the local resilience [fora 00:23:17] about the care homes."
"164","Yvonne: (23:18);We profile them now in a way that perhaps was never done before and this is very valuable for us going forward as a country that we have a truly integrated approach to care and yes, testing does occur in the nursing homes, but we have more to do, nursing and care homes. We understand there is much more to do here to get to every last quarter where there is anxiety, where the most vulnerable are, and our guidance has taken account of this to simplify what people actually need at the front line in that sector."
"165","Matt Hancock: (23:52);Anything more, Nick?"
"166","Nick Martin: (23:54);No. Thank you very much."
"167","Matt Hancock: (23:56);John Stevens at The Mail."
"168","John Stevens: (23:59);Thank you, House Secretary. Do you have updated figures on the number of NHS workers who have died after getting coronavirus and what are you doing to establish the reasons why?"
"169","Matt Hancock: (24:09);Yes. This is a really important question, and I don’t have an update on the figure of 19 NHS staff who’ve died that I gave yesterday, but what I can tell you is that we are looking into each circumstance to understand as much as is possible how they caught the virus, whether that was at work, outside of work, and the clinical setting that they were working in, and making sure that we learn as much as we possibly can and therefore of course protect our health workers as much as possible. Yvonne."
"170","Yvonne: (24:49);Thank you, Secretary of State. This is of great importance scientifically as well, that we understand why infections occur in hospitals across healthcare staff and what the avoidable factors in that might be. And that is something that is under investigation at the moment."
"171","Matt Hancock: (25:07);I mean, I would say, John, that the people who go into the NHS, as the prime minister so movingly said in his words in the video that he recorded this morning that I hope you’ve seen, the admiration for those who put themselves in harm’s way is incredibly high. They’re unbelievable. And therefore, it’s of course, incumbent on us to make sure that we get to the bottom of each and individual case and learn everything we can so that we can better protect people in the future, and so that we can give a full account to the family and loved ones of each member of the NHS family who’s died."
"172","John Stevens: (25:56);Can I just ask a quick follow up?"
"173","Matt Hancock: (25:56);Yes, of course, yeah."
"174","John Stevens: (25:58);I wanted to ask on the prime minister, if you know if he’s been given advice and how long he should rest for before he returns to work?"
"175","Matt Hancock: (26:05);He is resting. He’s at Checkers, and I’m delighted that he’s out of hospital and has recovered, but there isn’t any advice on how long. That’ll be a clinical decision for his doctors to take with him. The government is operating perfectly efficiently within the strategy that he set out. Nicola Bartlett from The Mirror."
"176","Nicola Bartlett: (26:33);Secretary of State, you’ve talked about a reduction in the time that it’s taken to get PPE to those places that need it down to two and a half days. I wanted to ask you if that is an acceptable time during which the NHS staff that you’ve just praised will be putting themselves in harm’s way while treating patients?"
"177","Matt Hancock: (26:54);Thanks for the question. Just to be clear, the two and a half days is the time taken to fulfill a …"
"178","Matt Hancock: (27:03);It is the time taken to fulfill a query. So we have a 24/7 hotline for all of the 58,000 locations that we now need to get PPE to, and that they can call when they’ve got a need. And the two and a half days is not necessarily, or particularly a time to wait for PPE without any, because many of the times that people call that hotline, they call saying, “We’ll run out by the end of the week,” for instance. The more urgent cases where the shortage is more acute, we act on immediately, so the two and a half days is an average and so it shouldn’t be interpreted that people are waiting for two and a half days, that’s not the measure."
"179","Matt Hancock: (27:48);The reason the measure is important is because it’s the way of tracking how quickly we’re able to go from somebody raising an alarm on that phone number, which is there so that anybody in the system, in an organization that receives protective equipment from us can then get the protective equipment, and it’s a measure of how fast the system can respond. And the challenge of getting protective equipment to every single person is very complicated and so you have to have measures of how we’re progressing against that. Because my ultimate goal, making sure everybody has it at every moment that they need, is one that we are driving hard at, but we’ve got to be able to measure the progress on the way."
"180","Speaker 3: (28:38);And just on that point, Mr. Hancock, we’ve known about the dangers of this virus for many months now and that it was likely that the UK would have to respond to this challenge. Were we too late in putting in the orders and putting some of these measures in place to get that vital equipment to people? Because other countries have managed to protect their staff in a way that we don’t seem to have been able to do."
"181","Matt Hancock: (29:02);Well. I think that’s … I don’t quite agree with that. Firstly, when I talk to my colleagues across the world, we share this challenge. And the reason is that we have the stockpiles, we went into this with the stockpiles and the challenge is a logistical one of having previously had an organization that serves just over 200 NHS organizations. The demand for PH and the need for it has gone up enormously, and there’s now 58,000 organizations that this huge logistical operation services. And so it’s been a challenge of logistics as much as one of supply, and that’s what the PPE plan that I set out on Friday goes into detail of, to explain the challenges in that distribution. But also we, at the same time, of course, have got to replenish the stockpiles that we went into this with. So we did actually go in with some quite significant stockpiles, but of course, given the sheer quantities that we’re distributing across the system, we’re using those stockpiles up and we need to replenish them as well."
"182","Matt Hancock: (30:18);Arj Singh from the HuffPost."
"183","Arj Singh: (30:22);Good afternoon. The Chief Scientific Adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, was happy to go on record last month to say the 20,000 deaths or fewer would be in his words, “A good outcome for the UK.” Given that we’ve now hit 10,000, can we still achieve that good outcome?"
"184","Matt Hancock: (30:39);Well that’s … The best way, I’m going to ask Yvonne to come in on this, but I think the thing that I’d say the best way to respond to the question is to say that the future path of this pandemic in this country is determined by how people act. And that’s why it’s so important that people follow the social distancing guidelines. And I know that we sometimes repeat this message, but we repeat it for a reason because it’s so important."
"185","Matt Hancock: (31:09);The twin goals of having the social distancing guidelines followed so that we reduce the spread of the virus and at the same time making sure that the NHS capacity is always there to treat people, these are the most important measures that we’ve got. And for discussion about PPE is important and discussion about gowns and medicine shortages, all of these things are important, but the capacity of the NHS to treat every single person and the behavior of everyone in this country to do their bit to flatten the curve are the most important things that we can possibly be doing. And so predictions are not possible, precisely because they depend on the behavior of the British people and I’m really glad that at the moment the British people this weekend are doing their bit. Yvonne?"
"186","Yvonne Doyle: (32:06);Thank you, Secretary of State. And I would absolutely agree with this, because just as we’re learning about the virus and its behavior, we’re learning about deaths and why deaths are occurring in the way that they are, and can we actually do anything more than we’re doing? And at the moment, at this stage of this epidemic, by far the most important thing to do is exactly what we’re doing, which is social distancing, breaking the chain of transmission and shielding the most vulnerable, which is an absolutely crucial element of this. And we are watching that day by day, sometimes many times a day including what is happening with deaths. So that’s what we need to do for some time to come."
"187","Matt Hancock: (32:54);Thanks very much, Arj. Jill Lawless from the AP."
"188","Jill Lawless: (32:54);Thank you very much, Mr. Hancock. You and the Prime Minister, today have both been paying tribute to people who work in the NHS and you both highlighted in particular, those who come from overseas. I mean, do you think that when this crisis is over, the government should be asking itself whether it has the right policies, both in terms of funding and organizing the NHS and also in terms of immigration? Because we’ve seen an awful lot of people that work in health care and social care and do vital jobs, have been classed as low skilled workers and told they’re not a priority."
"189","Matt Hancock: (33:25);Well, I’m not sure about that. Firstly, we brought in the NHS Visa precisely to be able to attract people from around the world to work in the NHS. Now, I’m incredibly proud of the people who’ve come to this country to work in the NHS. And you’re right, yesterday I highlighted the fact that, tragically, a disproportionate number of those in the NHS who’ve died are people who came to make their lives here and to work in the NHS and have given their lives working in the NHS, and I pay tribute to them and I want to acknowledge that. But I would say that in terms of immigration policy, the NHS Visa is precisely a reflection of our respect for, and an admiration of those who’ve come from overseas to work in the NHS. And on the support for unfunding of the NHS, I’m also delighted that we went into this crisis with record numbers of people and record funding in the NHS."
"190","Matt Hancock: (34:29);But there’s no doubt that afterwards, of course, everybody’s going to ask all sorts of questions and will reflect on that. But I think that it’s fair to say that my admiration for those who work in the NHS, whether they come from overseas or whether they were born here, it doesn’t matter, my admiration for them is unparalleled. And I think that at this moment, the fact that it’s so obvious to them that the nation really values their work, from the Prime Minister down, if you saw his message. I think that is the most important message we can give them as they take the brave steps as they do each day of going into work to tackle the virus."
"191","Matt Hancock: (35:19);Thanks very much indeed, that concludes today’s Downing Street briefing and we’ll no doubt see you all again tomorrow."
"192","Speaker 4: (35:35);See the headlines as they happen and watch BBC News live in the app and get the full story with bbc.co.uk/news. Follow the story for all the latest with BBC News."
"193","Dominic Raab: (00:00);… and lets defeat the coronavirus for good. Now, Patrick, I don’t know whether you’re going to give us some more detail on both the state of the coronavirus but also SAGE’s advice today."
"194","Patrick Vallance: (00:10);I’ll do that, yes. Can I have the first slide please? This is one you’ve seen before. It’s the transport use showing the reduction that’s maintained down. It is these sorts of changes, the fact that we’ve managed, all of us, to keep our social-distancing going that’s meant that the transmission of the virus in the community has reduced. And SAGE looked very carefully at all of the evidence and is of the opinion that it is highly likely that the R is below one."
"195","Patrick Vallance: (00:39);The transmission force of the virus is below one, meaning as the first secretary has said, that one person will, on average, be infecting fewer than one other person. That’s an important change. It means in the community, it’s likely that the virus and the epidemic is now shrinking. There are areas such as hospitals and social care settings where there may be growth in some places, but overall, the R is below one, but we can’t say by how much."
"196","Patrick Vallance: (01:11);Next slide, please. This shows the new cases. Of course, as I’ve said before, this is just the cases that are tested in hospitals, so it’s not the totality. The blue bars are the people who were tested in hospital, and there is a flattening and possibly signs of decrease. The orange bars show that the testing has now been expanded to critical workers in the NHS, social care and other sectors, and of course, cases are being picked up amongst that population too. But the overall message is that cases are at least flattening and may be decreasing."
"197","Patrick Vallance: (01:53);Next slide, please. This is probably the critical slide. This shows people in hospital beds with COVID infection. Here you can see, across many regions the numbers are decreasing. In some, they’re flat, so there is some regional variation. But again, this is consistent with the idea that the R is below one, somewhere between 0.5 and one. The closer it is to one, the more likely it is that even small changes in the measures that are in place could lead to the R going above one."
"198","Patrick Vallance: (02:36);If the R above one, this starts to grow again, fast, it may be quite difficult to predict and detect that growth, and then we run the risk of a second peak with all of the damage that that will cause to health and to the economy. So at the moment, this is looking in a good place. It’s beginning to come down, beginning to stabilize in some places. And it’s important that all the measures that we’re taking stay in place in order to allow us to maintain this level of control and to see the epidemic begin to decrease."
"199","Patrick Vallance: (03:13);Final slide, please. Sadly, of course, there are people who have died from this awful virus. I expect the deaths to reach a plateau and to stay up a bit for a little while and then to decrease thereafter. And what you can see on this slide, is both the deaths in hospital, and in the all settings, from the Office for National Statistics data, so the total picture can be seen. So SAGE’s view is that R is below one, that the changes that we’ve all made to our lives has made a difference and will continue to make a difference. It’s important that we continue with those in order to drive the numbers down and to get ourselves into a position where we can see that this is really now decreasing as an epidemic."
"200","Dominic Raab: (04:11);Patrick, thank you very much."
"201","Dominic Raab: (04:13);So we’ll take some questions from the media. Is Laura Kuenssberg there for the BBC?"
"202","Laura Kuenssberg: (04:19);Yeah. Thank you, Foreign Secretary. You’ve been very clear about why, in your view and SAGE’s view, now is not the time, but can you give the public any hope of when the restrictions might start to lift? As you said yourself, in other countries, people have been told when and what to expect. From what you know now, is it more likely that we’re looking at another three weeks or maybe another three months?"
"203","Dominic Raab: (04:42);Well, the prime minister had said at the outset that it would take three months to come through the peak, and I think that broadly is still the the outline. But what we set out today is our approach, which will be step-by-step guided by the evidence. It will be reviewed by SAGE at the end of the month. We’ve set out five points of principle, if you like, that will guide us."
"204","Dominic Raab: (05:02);So we can’t give a definitive timeframe, that would be to prejudge the evidence. That wouldn’t be a responsible thing to do. But our message to the British public, is there is light at the end of the tunnel, we are making progress, but at the same time, we must keep up the social-distancing measures. And there’ve been all sorts of challenges, Laura, as you’ll know, with this coronavirus crisis. But one of the things that we’ve seen is the country pull together, follow pretty consistently the guidance, and that is one of the reasons that we’ve made the progress that we have, not withstanding the significant, huge losses that I’ve described."
"205","Dominic Raab: (05:34);Do you want to come back?"
"206","Laura Kuenssberg: (05:35);Yeah, I mean as you say, people have overwhelmingly listened to the government’s guidance and followed it. Why do you think then you can’t share with the public anything about what might be next?"
"207","Dominic Raab: (05:48);We can. I’ve come and done these press conferences multiple times. We do them on a daily basis. The problem is not being willing to talk to the public about the detail of this, it’s that if we prejudice the data and the evidence that SAGE is getting, both on the spread of the virus and the extent to which we get it down, well below the level R one, we’d be prejudging the decision that we need to take. And likewise, the evidence SAGE is getting is constantly informing, it’s an iterative process, the options that we’ve got."
"208","Dominic Raab: (06:23);So what I’ve tried to do is be as upfront as possible and set out the principles, if you like, the five principles that can give, I think, a bit of hope to the country and also to say, “Come on, we’ve got to keep this up. What you’re doing is working.” I think we can see the signs of that, not withstanding the death toll, which is a huge tragedy for so many people. But we must stay the course and if we let up now it would be, as Sir Patrick has explained, damaging for public health but also damaging for the economy."
"209","Dominic Raab: (06:51);It’s not a trade off here. If we get a second peak, it’s not just damaging for peoples’ health and for public safety, we’ll also end up back in a second lockdown, which would prolong the economic risks. So we’re taking the right decision at the right time, as we’ve always said. And the truth is, if I start giving you artificial and arbitrary timeframes, it would be the irresponsible thing to do and I can’t do that."
"210","Dominic Raab: (07:15);Tom Clarke from ITV."
"211","Tom Clarke: (07:18);Thank you very much, Foreign Secretary. In yesterday’s press briefing, Professor Whitty, when asked about how we should manage this next phase of the outbreak, that data that SAGE needs, [inaudible 00:07:30] talking about, he said one bit of information that would be really useful is serology data. Namely, this is the survey data of blood supplies from the country to get a sense of how much of the population has been infected with the virus, and therefore how many may be immune to it."
"212","Tom Clarke: (07:46);The PHE labs in Porton Down have tested more than 3000 samples from that survey, but the results have yet to be published. Is that because, as I understand it from scientists who are familiar with the work going on there, that these tests are not delivering reliable results? Either because of the tests themselves or because of what’s going on in the immune systems of people who are being infected. And where does that leave us, in terms of figuring out how big a potential second peak or how long we have to stay in a lockdown situation is? Are we currently flying blind?"
"213","Dominic Raab: (08:18);Thank you, Tom. I’ll let Chris address that."
"214","Chris Whitty: (08:21);Thank you. So serology data is going to be absolutely critical for a whole lot of reasons. The most important of which, at this point of the epidemic, is to work out what proportion of people look as if they have been infected. We have a kind of crude estimate, but that’s a way of measuring it directly. It will, in the longer term, also probably be important in understanding our options. For example, getting a vaccine. And it may also be useful in very longer term to provide evidence that someone has actually had an infection and they remain immune if the tests are reliable."
"215","Chris Whitty: (08:55);Now, that’s why it’s important. You’re absolutely right. There is a lot of work, not just going on in Porton Down, to be clear, there are now substantial bodies of work in the academic sector, in Public Health England, and in many commercial areas, because everybody wants to have an accurate serology. There are several different ways of approaching this and different people are going down different groups."
"216","Chris Whitty: (09:21);Broadly, there are three things that have slowed us down to date. The first of which is we don’t yet have a serological test which we can put a lot of reliance on, although it can give us a ranging shot. We do expect to have really quite crude early data, but that definitely needs to be improved on. The second thing, is that we don’t yet have a good sampling, what’s called a sampling frame in epidemiological terms, and what we’re trying to do is get that set up across the country so that we have a wide view about what’s happened in this infection in various areas."
"217","Chris Whitty: (09:58);But the third thing, which is just a fact of biology, is that it takes probably at least 21 days for the test to be reliable. So you’re always looking back in time on this, and early data will therefore be … Because looking back in time, 21 days, the epidemic was as at a much earlier stage before we’ve reached the evidence of the beginning of the peak, which Sir Patrick talked about. That is a very different stage of the infection, and we will get, the data will become more useful over time. But we’re moving very fast in this area scientifically, but we are definitely not there in either of the issues or getting a serology or getting the sampling frame. But we probably will have a crude ranging shot fairly soon, and that’s the consensus of the scientists involved."
"218","Dominic Raab: (10:48);Tom, I think that gives you a pretty detailed answer. Is there anything you wanted to come back on?"
"219","Tom Clarke: (10:52);That was a very detailed answer. Can I just have one follow-up though? An interesting addition today to the data, we’ve got this all cases addition to the number of cases, so-"
"220","Tom Clarke: (11:03);… that’s outside of the hospital setting. How, it looks like that’s going to be very important. Is it going to change SAGE’s predictions of how the peak is manifesting itself and what is happening with R, specifically, are we seeing faster transmission for example in the care home setting at the moment and that’s something you’re now going to have to factor in to any next phase response."
"221","Dominic Raab: (11:30);Patrick, I’ll let you address that one."
"222","Patrick Vallance: (11:32);Well as I said before, I think it’s very important to have the hospital death rate and the total death rate. It’s worth remembering again that the ONS rates are people who’ve got COVID on their death certificate. It doesn’t necessarily mean they were infected because many of them haven’t been tested. So we just need to understand the difference. In terms of the SAGE view, the SAGE view is looking at the R of the transmission in the community and I don’t think any of those data change that opinion as to where the R is. As I’ve said, it’s not true that the R is necessarily below one in every hospital or in every care home, and that’s the important area that we now need to look at and make sure that the appropriate measures are in place to try and reduce the R there but it doesn’t change the overall view that I’ve described, that the R overall is below one and therefore we expect to see the slowing and the turn of the epidemic."
"223","Dominic Raab: (12:34);I think Chris wanted to just add something."
"224","Chris Whitty: (12:36);So just on top of what Sir Patrick said, the ONS data of course tells us not only the people who are diagnosed as having COVID on the death certificate with a diagnosis, some of which is on a basis of tests, some on the basis of the fact that doctor thought it was likely but not definite, but it also gives an indication of what’s called excess mortality. The difference between the normal death rate, sadly at this time of year and what we’ve got at the moment and that’s been changing over time and there are some additional deaths on top of the ones that you would expect for this time of year. So in the last week for which we have data from ONS, 3,475 people were diagnosed as having COVID, some of them from in hospital, some of them from out of hospital, but the excess mortality was, in terms of the period as a whole for that week, was depending on whether you compare it to the week before or the same week last year, somewhere between five and 6,000 people."
"225","Chris Whitty: (13:36);Now that there’s a gap between those. Now that could be just random variation, but one of the things that we’ve said from the beginning is that people die for many reasons in epidemics. They include the direct cause of death, but they can also include people who died, for example, if they stayed at home because they were worried that going into hospital was dangerous for them and actually they have a heart attack or a stroke or something important like that."
"226","Chris Whitty: (14:02);And the reason I’m making this point, other than just to clarify the data, is it is really critical for people to realize if they’re having a medical emergency, we really appreciate people taking pressure off the NHS for the less urgent things. But if they’re having a medical emergency, a heart attack, a stroke, a really bad a flare up of asthma, things like that, which could be life threatening. One of the things that the British public have done by taking the pressure off the NHS by staying at home and my remarkable colleagues in the NHS have done by building up NHS capacity is we’ve always maintained the ability to handle emergencies, whether COVID or not."
"227","Chris Whitty: (14:37);And I really want to encourage people that if they have other medical emergencies, the NHS is open for business, and we really must encourage people who are having these life threatening or life changing things to go to hospital, contact NHS 111 where that’s necessary, because we would be very sad to have a situation where people’s activities and the NHS had managed to preserve the ability to do emergencies and people were not coming forward."
"228","Dominic Raab: (15:07);Tom, thanks very much. Sam Coates from Sky News."
"229","Sam Coates: (15:12);Dominic Raab, Sky analysis has found that 70% of frontline health and social care staff who’ve died from coronavirus were from a non white and [inaudible 00:15:22] backgrounds. Now people in that community are very worried. They know you’re having a review because you’ve announced it, but what specifically can you say to help them? Is the government on their side? What is your message to that community? To Patrick Vallance and Chris Whitty, Dominic Raab just said that we could eventually relax in some areas and strengthen the lockdown in others, but every time older people hear things like that, they get worried seeing everybody else is the priority. There’s a perhaps justified fear that they might be kept indoors until there’s a vaccine, which might be 18 months. They are worried that they might never see their grandkids for at least another year. What’s your message to them at this anxious time?"
"230","Dominic Raab: (16:03);Well, Sam, first of all, on your first question on the BME or any other demographic breakdown of the data, I think I’m going to defer to Patrick in terms of the analysis of that, but absolutely we’re on the side of anyone. Frankly, this coronavirus doesn’t discriminate, but we will want to follow very carefully any of the analysis of the data and the way you described. On your second point, and I’ll certainly let Patrick and Chris comment. What I said was measures could involve various different permutations, some getting stronger, some easing off. We haven’t made up our mind on any of that, but our priority has been to safeguard life. One of the things that the British public have been very effective in doing is denying coronavirus the means to spread, and of course we know that the, and the data shows very clearly, that those who are older or have a preexisting condition are particularly vulnerable."
"231","Dominic Raab: (16:57);So far from wanting to take measures which disproportionately prejudice them, we want to take measures which safeguard them and that’s been the guiding principle in relation to anyone who’s particularly vulnerable to the coronavirus throughout this crisis. I don’t know whether Chris or Patrick."
"232","Patrick Vallance: (17:12);I’ll take the second question, then Chris, I think you might take the one on ethnicity. On the second one, our aim is very clear, which is to get the numbers down now and that means the social distancing measures that are in place need to stay in place in order to reduce the numbers of people with the infection in the community. That allows the, I mean that’s because the R comes down, but it’s also the absolute number that needs to come down. So we’ve got fewer people carrying the infection. Once we’re at that stage, then you can start to think about which are the measures that make most sense to release in order to not have another growth and put the R above one and in doing so, the aim there is to try and do that in a way that allows everything to start moving more towards normal, not to segregate on certain groups and so on and say that there is a differential approach to this."
"233","Patrick Vallance: (18:07);Now it may be necessary when you look at different jobs and different things to think about how you do that in a way that’s safe. But the aim certainly in terms of how we’re viewing it from the scientific angle is to try to understand the basic principles that reduce transmission and allow the policymakers to take those basic principles and apply them in a number of different settings."
"234","Dominic Raab: (18:30);Chris, would you like to add on the ethnicity point?"
"235","Chris Whitty: (18:32);So it’s absolutely critical that we find out which groups are most at risk so that we can help to protect them, and obviously there are three things which are really clear and ethnicity is less clear. The three things that are very clear are age, and that’s one of the reasons it’s so critical to protect older citizens. People who’ve got co-morbidities, people we’ve got more than one other disease. Things like cardiovascular disease, and if you look at the ONS data on this, over 90% of people who have sadly died of this had at least one other disease. Many of them had more than one, and actually male sex is a very clear risk factor for reasons that are not absolutely clear."
"236","Chris Whitty: (19:13);Ethnic, being a member of an ethnic minority group is less clear and we both looked and I’ve had discussions with scientists about this in terms of trying to tease this apart today. Also, looking very specifically at healthcare workers with leaders at the NHS and across the medical and nursing professionals. Because this is something we are very keen to get extremely clear. We’ve asked Public Health England to look at this in some detail, and then what we really want is if we see any signal at all, we want to then know what next we can do about it to minimize risk. But at this point in time whilst the age, co-morbidity, and gender is clear, this is not yet clear in terms of I think minorities and we need to look at this more carefully and get this right."
"237","Dominic Raab: (20:00);Sam, would you like to come back on any of that?"
"238","Sam Coates: (20:03);Just one thing. It sometimes feels like ministers, Number 10, are trying to pretend that there isn’t a debate about what happens next, but you only have to pick up a paper or look at a TV broadcast to see plenty of people speculating about the what next and the easing of the lockdown. Is it really wise and sensible for ministers to almost absent themselves from the field in this debate given that it’s happening anyway?"
"239","Dominic Raab: (20:27);Well, I don’t think we can be accused of absenting ourselves from the debate. We turn up to these Downing Street press conferences. I’ve set out the five principles. I’ve also explained why I know the media will always want to tease out what the next question is that needs to be answered, but it would be irresponsible for us to set out in either more detail the measures that are being considered as potential options, or indeed the timeframe because we don’t have the data yet from SAGE. So we’ll continue to be guided by the principles we started with. That is, follow the scientific evidence, take the right decisions at the right moment in time, and I think I addressed that fully in my remarks. Ben Kentish from LBC."
"240","Ben Kentish: (21:08);Thank you. First Secretary, you’ve said today that the spread of the virus in the community is because of the sacrifices people are making on the way down, but in care homes and hospitals, it’s on the way up. Whether that’s because of a lack of protective equipment, a lack of testing, or another reason. Would you accept that the measures in place in those settings have proved inadequate, and what would you do to make sure that some of the most vulnerable people in the country aren’t put a further risk in places where they ought to feel safe? And if I could just ask Professor Whitty, you talk very openly there about the indirect cost, the indirect deaths that arise effectively as a result of the lockdown. I’m really interested to know whether you’ve modeled that, whether you’re able to put a number on what would be expected, and some scientists have warned that in time, those deaths will outweigh the deaths from the virus itself. Are you confident that we’re a long way from that point, and are you able to say when it might come?"
"241","Ben Kentish: (22:03);Thank you."
"242","Dominic Raab: (22:05);Thanks. Well, so first of all, the coronavirus doesn’t apply, doesn’t spread in a uniform, consistent way and so your absolutely right, we’ve made progress. I think Patrick and Chris have set that out, but in terms of care homes, we’re absolutely gripping this."
"243","Dominic Raab: (22:21);The Home Health Secretary on Wednesday set out a plan and you asked, in particular, “What’s the detail of what we’re doing?” That the plan was to make sure that all care home residents and staff with symptoms will be tested, that all patients discharged from hospital will be tested before going into care homes."
"244","Dominic Raab: (22:38);Care homes are being supported with different mechanisms to order PPE quickly. We had a local resilience forum drop, to deal with distribution to care homes. Obviously dispersed more widely than hospitals. We’ve had one last week. We’ve got another one this week. We’re working up the clipper service which will regularize and expedite the distribution more generally."
"245","Dominic Raab: (23:01);We’ve got the plan to expand the workforce in care homes to 20,000 through a new recruitment campaign and new guidance to minimize the spread of the infection. So we recognize that the virus hasn’t spread uniformly. We’re absolutely committed to making sure wherever it’s reared, it is being tackled in as targeted and as concrete way as we possibly can."
"246","Dominic Raab: (23:25);I think Patrick were you… Did you get the second one? Or, was that Chris?"
"247","Patrick Vallance: (23:28);I think-"
"248","Chris Whitty: (23:29);Me first, but Patrick might want to add to that. I’ve said from the early on, you’re absolutely right, that indirect deaths, we need to think about, and indirect other illness. Death is not the only thing. If someone has had, for example, a major operation postponed, that also is something that we need to remember and take account of."
"249","Chris Whitty: (23:49);So just to remind people, the four things I’ve laid out are direct deaths from the coronavirus, indirect deaths because the NHS emergency services are overwhelmed, and because of what the British public have done and because of the fantastic work of my NHS colleagues, we have not come close to that, and we do not intend to come close to that."
"250","Chris Whitty: (24:08);But the two other forms are indirect deaths because the NHS is reoriented towards COVID-19 and therefore less able to do other things that are not necessarily so urgent, but are very important."
"251","Chris Whitty: (24:22);And then finally, we know that anything that increases deprivation can, in the long run, cause issues. And we are absolutely looking at how these work and how they interact. Because in coming to the next phase of this, we need to take account of all of those, rather than just think about the direct COVID deaths."
"252","Chris Whitty: (24:42);Because if we just thought about those, we could end up having a much less targeted approach and one that didn’t allow the NHS to respond properly to all these other indirect causes. And this is actually something which SAGE, which Patrick chairs, has looked at in some detail and will continue to do. Patrick, you want to add to that?"
"253","Patrick Vallance: (25:01);Yeah, we look at it and just to reiterate the point I made earlier on, at the moment, this is not a tension between the economy and health. It’s very clear what we need to do now, which is to keep this down, stop this from coming back again, stop a second wave which would need a second lockdown if that occurs and make sure that we get things down to a level where this is manageable."
"254","Patrick Vallance: (25:21);So those two things are not in conflict at the moment, but yes, we do absolutely look at those longterm consequences and modeling maps and thinking about what the implications of that is."
"255","Dominic Raab: (25:31);And would you like to come back on any of that?"
"256","Ben Kentish: (25:34);Yes. If I may, just on the care home point First Secretary, it would seem the new measures that were introduced this week were a recognition that there wasn’t enough in place to protect people in cares hospitals. Are you confident there now is? And that those measures will be enough to protect people in those settings?"
"257","Dominic Raab: (25:50);Well, I noted that Care England, which represents the independent providers in the care sectors said, “It was heartening to know the government is listening and it’s really important.” And we are continuing to listen and as I said, this virus, the way it has spread is not being uniform or predictable, and we want to make sure that wherever it spreads as we try and get it down overall, that we’re there to make sure we’ve got the measures in place, the testing in place, the equipment in place to deal with it as soon as and as rapidly as possible. Thanks Ben. Dominic Yeatman from Metro."
"258","Dominic Yeatman: (26:23);Hello, First Secretary. Professor Ferguson said this morning that we will need to keep a significant level of social distancing until we have a vaccine, which we understand may take 18 months. Are you scared about discussing an exit strategy because there will be no real exit? And secondly, can I ask you, do you agree with the World Health Organization’s assessment this morning, which puts us in the same camp as Russia and Bella Russ with regard to our success in controlling the outbreak?"
"259","Dominic Raab: (26:57);Well, I don’t think the data internationally and Patrick talked through some of it, which shows the international comparisons would bear that out. But I haven’t heard and seen the direct comment, so I’ll pass judgment for the moment on that."
"260","Dominic Raab: (27:10);And in relation to your question about Neil, I mean I’ll ask Patrick to comment on it, but we’ve been very clear that we’ll take the right decisions at the right moments based on the evidence. And they may well involve a transition out of the current measures. And of course they could be calibrated in different ways."
"261","Dominic Raab: (27:28);And the reason that we need to do that is based on the five principles that I set out. How do we do this in a reliable way, which protects the NHS at the same time as allowing us to ease up on the economy and engage more in the kind of social activities that people want to?"
"262","Patrick Vallance: (27:48);So I completely agree that the way out of this is vaccines and therapeutics. Those are going to be critically important. There are vaccine programs across the world, over 80 around the world, probably four of those are in the clinic now. There are also therapeutic programs, both old drugs and people making new drugs and those are going to be critically important in terms of reducing the effects of this disease and potentially reducing transmission."
"263","Patrick Vallance: (28:15);So vaccines and therapeutics, critically important, no question about it. And the UK of course, is somewhere where a lot of that work is going on. Now, where we are now, as I’ve said, is that the social distancing measures are needed to reduce the levels right down to a low level. At that point there may be decisions about which ones to relax and which ones not to relax. It’s important to keep the R below one, and this is all about trying to reduce contacts, particularly between households, reduce transmission and keep the levels low across the community."
"264","Patrick Vallance: (28:51);So there may be a number of measures that need to continue in order to allow that to be suppressed and controlled whilst vaccines and therapeutics come along. But that’s very different from saying that the measures that are in place now are the ones that need to be in place longterm. So yes, there will be some changes, I think, that needs to take place that have already taken place around things like homeworking, that are going to be important to maintain that ability to break transmission."
"265","Patrick Vallance: (29:20);But vaccines and therapeutics are now being very actively looked at right the way across the world, including in the UK."
"266","Dominic Raab: (29:28);Dominic, would you like to follow- up on that?"
"267","Dominic Yeatman: (29:31);Thank you. And just in terms of lifting the lockdown, can you give us some idea of how many daily tests will have to be available before community testing can begin?"
"268","Dominic Raab: (29:44);Well, we’ve got the initial target of getting to 100,000 and then after that we want to keep ramping it up beyond that. And I think one of the crucial things that SAGE will do over the next couple of weeks until the end of the month, is then feed back on us on the evidence of how the evidence on the impact that the measures we’ve taken have had on the virus, what we need to consider in relation to that evidence in relation to measures, and how that interacts with testing and tracing?"
"269","Dominic Raab: (30:12);Chris, I don’t know whether you want to say anything further?"
"270","Chris Whitty: (30:13);No. I think that’s exactly the right thing to say."
"271","Dominic Raab: (30:16);Joe Murphy from the Evening Standard."
"272","Joe Murphy: (30:19);Thank you First Secretary. Can I ask Sir Patrick, following up on what you said earlier, you gave us the very good news that R is less than one in the community, and presumably well below one in hospital settings, but you still seemed concerned about other settings, and the position that the elderly population is obviously the one that springs to mind. Are you tacitly warning us to prepare for a lot more deaths to come despite today’s good news, more deaths to come in old people’s homes?"
"273","Patrick Vallance: (30:51);What I said was R is below one in the community. There may be where it’s not below one. That might include certain hospitals. It might include certain care settings and that’s a very important thing to tackle. Those numbers need to come down. There needs to be a control of the infection in those sorts of settings."
"274","Patrick Vallance: (31:11);Currently the proportion that they contribute to the overall picture is not entirely clear. There are measures being taken and Chris could speak to this better than I can, to try to get on top of these issues and they’re important ones that we do need to tackle if we’re going to drive the R down below one, right the way across every setting."
"275","Dominic Raab: (31:32);Joe, would you like to come back on that?"
"276","Joe Murphy: (31:36);No, I’ll ask something else to Chris Whitty, if I may. On the question of masks, if you could illuminate how you reached the government’s line that masks are no help outside a care setting, because it’s being challenged by experts like Jeremy Howard and Jeremy Hunt, who says they may reduce the spread on London Underground, when people get back to work after lockdown."
"277","Joe Murphy: (31:57);Specifically, can we ask, when the government came to that conclusion, did it consider only the medical evidence about transmission or was it also taking into account the obvious fact that they’re aren’t at the moment, enough masks to go round to the public?"
"278","Chris Whitty: (32:12);Well, it’s certainly the case that if there was ever a competition between healthcare workers and care workers in the front line, and people are using them in situations where the risk is incredibly low, I don’t think it takes a scientist or a doctor to work out that would be a very bad thing to happen."
"279","Chris Whitty: (32:32);And that’s one of the reasons why the World Health Organization reiterated its advice that in most settings, masks should be for healthcare workers. However, this is a very live issue that we are re-examining and SAGE, which Patrick chairs, re-looked at that this morning."
"280","Chris Whitty: (32:49);Other scientific groups are re-looking at the evidence. I think my summary to date would be the evidence is weak, but the evidence of a small effect is there under certain circumstances. And what we’re really trying to do is work out under what circumstances, if…"
"281","Chris Whitty: (33:03);… any, should we extend the advice, and under what circumstances should we not change that advice. But the point about scientific advice is it evolves and that is one of the things that we have to do the whole time is re-examine evidence as it comes in and that’s the reason SAGE has looked at it and why we’ve looked at it in other scientific settings."
"282","Dominic Raab: (33:21);Kitty Donaldson from Bloomberg."
"283","Kitty Donaldson: (33:24);Thank you. To Patrick Vallance and Chris Whitty, your slides today show that the UK is still tracking Italy in terms of deaths from the outbreak. Given we were four weeks behind Italy at the beginning of the outbreak, can you talk us through why we’re not making better progress lowering the death rate? And to the First Secretary of State, there’s been a lot of talk this week from your colleagues in the Tory Party about a reckoning with China. Do you think it will be business as usual with China when this is all over?"
"284","Dominic Raab: (33:53);Patrick, do you want to address the first one?"
"285","Patrick Vallance: (33:54);Yes, I think I’ve been clear that the R has come down, cases look as though they’ve come down in hospital, there’s a lag time before that translates into reduction in deaths. You can see there’s a flattening off of ICU cases. There’s a potential flattening off of deaths and I’ve said that that probably will reach a plateau and then come down. That’s very much the curve that’s been followed in other countries, so I repeat what I said, I think right at the beginning that I thought we were probably three or four weeks behind Italy."
"286","Dominic Raab: (34:30);On the question in relation to China. Look, I think there absolutely needs to be a very, very deep dive after the event, review of the lessons including the outbreak of the virus and I don’t think we can flinch from that at all and it needs to be driven by the science. At the same time, I think the one thing that coronavirus has taught us is the value and the importance of international cooperation. I’ve just been standing in for the PM on the G7 meeting where we’ve been going through all of the areas where the UK is providing a leading role and working very closely with all of our international colleagues on. And I have to say, there are all of these questions about the outbreak, but also we had very good cooperation with the Chinese in relation to the return of UK nationals the outset from Wuhan, and we have on procurement the things that we need. So we ought to look at all sides of this and do it in a balanced way, but there’s no doubt week we can’t have business as usual after this crisis and we’ll have to ask the hard questions that how it came about and how it couldn’t have been stopped earlier."
"287","Dominic Raab: (35:35);Kitty, do you want to come back on any of that?"
"288","Kitty Donaldson: (35:38);Yes, just First Secretary, what does that mean in practice? Does that mean tariffs? Or does it mean greater restrictions on Chinese investment in the UK? How do you see that playing out?"
"289","Dominic Raab: (35:50);Well, what I just said was that we’d looked very carefully and with all of the other international partners and indeed with the WHO and the other international organizations as to how this outbreak and what can be done to prevent it happening in the future. I think before you get those answers, you can’t really track a way forward."
"290","Dominic Raab: (36:07);Bill Jacobs from The Lancashire Telegraph."
"291","Bill Jacobs: (36:10);Gentlemen, the number of COVID-19 cases and deaths in the Northwest is one of the worst in the country as your slide showed. Do you have any reasons for why this is, such as deprivation or widespread longterm ill health? And are you taking special measures in the region to tackle these tragically high figures?"
"292","Chris Whitty: (36:40);They’re pointing at me so I’ll give an answer to that. I mean, I think on both sides of the equation. So until quite recently, the Northwest was tracking several other bits of the country, including the Southeast and the West Midlands, but below London. And actually in the data that Sir Patrick showed at the beginning, what you can see is actually COVID cases in the Northwest have actually started to trend downwards recently, having previously been trending upwards. But it’s quite a short time period so I don’t want to over read on that issue."
"293","Chris Whitty: (37:16);The two areas where I think we need to look particularly carefully, but I think they’re ones which is true across the country, we need to look quite carefully at all cause mortality, so not just the COVID related mortality and that tends to be linked together. And we do need to look at care homes because if you look at care homes where there have been outbreaks, quite a few of them have been in the Northwest and this is why the the measures that were announced yesterday really to look at the care home issue are so important."
"294","Dominic Raab: (37:46);Bill, would you like to come back with the last one?"
"295","Bill Jacobs: (37:49);Yes. It’s the number of cases in the Northwest remains stubbornly high, could this mean a slower release from a lockdown in the region than elsewhere in the country? And what steps is the government taking to tackle mental health problems as a result of the pandemic?"
"296","Dominic Raab: (38:07);Well, there’s all sorts… I’ll let Chris address the mental health issue, but there’s all sorts of fluidity in the data. What we need to do is make sure that we continue to monitor it very carefully. We want to get it down across all regions. We want to get the R level down as consistently as we possibly can, and also in terms of measures that might be taken, them be informed by the evidence that we get back. The critical thing is to wait until SAGE has done that analysis. They’re talking about being it by the end of the month. We’ll look at it very carefully. And I don’t think we can jump ahead as to what the measures might be or any of the variations of it at this point."
"297","Patrick Vallance: (38:43);Shall I just answer about variation as well."
"298","Dominic Raab: (38:46);Yeah."
"299","Patrick Vallance: (38:46);There isn’t really a huge variation in timing across the country for most of this. There’s a little bit. Most things are following the same sort of trajectory and actually most of us right the way across country have adhered to the measures of social distancing in the same way. So there’s much more similarity than difference actually in terms of the time course and trajectory of the epidemic across the country."
"300","Chris Whitty: (39:09);I agree with Patrick’s point. But just on mental health. And it’s an absolutely key point and one that we’ve been from the beginning concerned about and there are several different aspects to it, which include the risk of people increasing loneliness and include issues about delivery of mental health services across the whole country and indeed around the world in this new era of COVID-19. At the moment, we’ve set up quite a large number of things to try and look at how we can improve on mental health services. But you’re absolutely right, it’s an area where everybody who’s looked at this is concerned, and there’s recently been a serious look by our academic colleagues to try and work out what are the things we need to do differently as a result of this COVID epidemic for mental health than we would do under normal circumstances."
"301","Dominic Raab: (39:59);Thanks, Bill. Thanks everyone. And that brings to a close today’s press conference. Thank you very much."
"302","Rishi Sunak: (00:07);Good evening from Downing Street where I’m joined by professor Angela McLean, Deputy Chief Scientific Advisor and Yvonne Doyle, Medical Director of Public Health England. Before I provide an update on the economic situation, let me start by addressing the issue upper most on people’s minds, personal protective equipment or PPE. This is an international challenge that many other countries are experiencing. Alongside the efforts of British businesses and our embassies around the world, we are working hard to get the PPE our frontline NHS and social care staff need. We have appointed Paul Deighton, formally chief executive of the London 2012 Olympics to lead on our domestic efforts to make an increase the supply of PPE. And we are receiving shipments of PPE regularly from suppliers in the UK and abroad. We’re working to resolve the Turkish shipment of PPE as soon as possible following some unexpected delays at the weekend. Today we have unloaded a shipment of 140,000 gowns from Myanmar and we are of course continuing to pursue every possible option for PPE procurement."
"303","Rishi Sunak: (01:22);Let me now turn to the economic situation. Exactly a month ago today, I stood at this lectern and said we would step in and help to pay people’s wages. We promised this support would be available by the end of April, today we deliver our promise. HMRC opened the coronavirus job retention scheme at eight o’clock this morning. As of four o’clock this afternoon over 140,000 firms have applied and the grants they’ll receive will help pay the wages of more than a million people. A million people who if they hadn’t been furloughed would have been at risk of losing their job. Firms applying today should receive their cash in six working days. HMRC will continue to provide updates on the number of people furloughed. And let me put on record my thanks to the thousands of staff at HMRC and HMT who have made this happen. People have come out of retirement, put aside their normal duties and worked around the clock from their kitchen tables and spare rooms to get this new system up and running."
"304","Rishi Sunak: (02:37);This remarkable story of public service reminds us how many different people are playing a role in this crisis and I’m very grateful to all of them for everything they have done. It’s important to be clear why we have introduced the CGRS and the other schemes we’ve put in place to support the self employed and businesses. We’ve never seen an economic crisis like this one. Times like this demand that we put aside ideology and orthodoxy. Times like this demand that a state turns to its most immediate purpose, the protection and support of its people. The goal of the new schemes we’ve developed is to maintain as many people as possible in their existing jobs, to support viable businesses to stay afloat and to protect the incomes of the self employed to allow them to trade again. To maintain, in other words, our economy’s productive capacity so that we can bridge through this crisis."
"305","Rishi Sunak: (03:43);That is what we have done and the office of budget responsibility said last week that the situation would have been much worse if it hadn’t been for our actions. But in everything we have done, even in our defense against the immediate crisis, we have also been sowing the seeds of our ultimate recovery. As we look ahead and start to plan for our recovery, it is critical we don’t just maintain companies and jobs that already exist, but that we also encourage the businesses, jobs and technologies of the future. Innovation and entrepreneurship have powered growth in our country for centuries and it is what will drive our growth as we recover from this crisis. To that end earlier today, I launched two initiatives to support the most innovative firms in the country worth 1.25 billion pounds. First, we are launching a new future fund worth 500 million pounds to make sure that high growth companies across the UK can continue to access the investment they need during this crisis."
"306","Rishi Sunak: (04:51);Launching in May the future fund will provide UK based early stage companies with convertible loans between 125,000 pounds and 5 million pounds. Our future fund will match investments made by private investors in early stage businesses on terms that protect the UK taxpayer. Second, alongside the new future fund, the business secretary Alok Sharma has worked closely with Innovate UK, our national innovation agency, to provide 750 million pounds of grant and loan funding for tens of thousands of highly innovative firms in every sector, every region and every nation of the UK. He like I believe strongly in the role of innovation and enterprise in recovering our economy. As I said last week, right now the most important thing we can do for the health of our economy is to protect the health of our people. We must continue to slow the spread of the virus to make sure fewer people need hospital treatment at any one time and protect the NHS’ ability to cope."
"307","Rishi Sunak: (06:04);Today, the government’s ongoing monitoring and testing program reports 501,379 tests for coronavirus have now been carried out including 19,316 tests carried out yesterday. 124,743 people have tested positive an increase of 4,676 cases since yesterday. 17,971 people are currently in hospital with coronavirus in the UK and sadly of those who have been hospitalized 16,509 have now died, an increase of 449 fatalities since yesterday. Our thoughts are with the families and friends of all those who have lost their lives. As we look forward towards the next stage in our battle against this disease, there are encouraging signs we hope that we are making progress. But before we consider it safe to adjust any of the current social distancing measures, we must be satisfied that we have met the five tests set out last week by the first secretary."
"308","Rishi Sunak: (07:15);Those tests mean that the NHS can continue to cope, that the daily death rate for sustainably and consistently that the rate of infection is decreasing, that the operational challenges have been met and most importantly that there is no risk of a second peak. So I want to thank each and every person across the UK who is following the government’s advice to stay at home, protect our NHS and ultimately save lives. Thank you. Let me now hand over to Angela before taking questions from the media."
"309","Angela McLean: (07:50);Thank you. The first piece of data that we have to look at this afternoon is about that issue of how people are staying at home. So what we see here is a record of how many people have been using different kinds of transport since the middle of March. And what that shows is how people have responded to this call that all of us do need to stay home. And in particular what you see is that for all kinds of public transport use now is down to less than 20% of what it was during February. Indeed rail and tube use are down by 95%. So for all those people who have stayed at home in order to protect the NHS and save lives, I think we can look at this graph and say pretty much everybody else is doing it as well. If I could have the next slide please."
"310","Angela McLean: (08:42);And that’s reflected in these data which are about new UK cases running from the 21st of March to the 20th of April. And what you see in blue there is what are called pillar one people, people who’ve been tested positive. So that’s mostly people in hospital. And then in the orange on top is swab testing for key workers and their households. And the relief that you get when you look at that picture is to see that there’s a stock rising and is now pretty much stable and flat. Next slide please."
"311","Angela McLean: (09:21);And that’s reflected in this data about people who are in hospital with COVID-19. Across the whole country, that also remains stable. But here in London this is now the seventh day in the row that those numbers have fallen. So that means that the balance between people who are going into hospital because they’ve fallen ill and people who are going home because they’re well again now is in the opposite direction so that there are fewer people each day in hospital with COVID. We’re looking forward to seeing that pattern replicated across other regions of the country. Next slide, please. Finally, we get to the slide comparing how many people have died in the UK-"
"312","Angela: (10:03);… in comparison with other countries. We have two different ways of keeping track of that here. We have the most, the very up to date data, which goes right to yesterday and that’s UK, but only counts death that’s that occurred, sadly, for people who are in hospital, and there’s a deaths by the date of registration. Then further back on that slide, you can see data from the UK for all settings and that data takes longer to put together and present. So that’s why, on this slide, that data is only a shorter data run. With that, I will finish so that we can turn to questions."
"313","Rishi Sunak: (10:43);Brilliant. Thank you, Angela. Can we turn first to Hugh Pym from the BBC?"
"314","Hugh Pym: (10:49);Yes. Thank you. I want you to pick up on the issue of PPE, which you mentioned. We’re hearing of continuing concerns amongst some health and care workers about PPE. Are you ashamed as a government that there are some NHS staff going into work who say they’re worried about their safety because they fear their hospitals might run out of PPE?"
"315","Rishi Sunak: (11:14);Thank you Hugh. Absolutely, everybody working incredibly hard on the front line deserves to have the equipment they need to be able to do their job safely and we’re working around the clock to make sure that we can deliver on that. Obviously, a billion pieces of PPE have been delivered, I think 12 million yesterday, and as you heard from me, we’re improving our sourcing internationally and domestically, to make sure we can get the PPE we need, but in what is a very challenging international context. But people on the frontline can rest assured that we are doing absolutely everything we can and straining everything we can to get the equipment that they need. I don’t know, Yvonne, if you want to add anything?"
"316","Yvonne Doyle: (11:51);Thank you chancellor. So yes, Hugh, it is of concern and obviously we want people who are working on the front line with patients at high risk to have what they need. Over this weekend. I know, for instance, that 12 million pieces have been delivered to 141 trusts and as has been said, there’s incredible work going on internationally, in a very high burn rate situation. But also working to ensure that people use the guidance that is there in the most precautionary way to make the very best use, in a safe way, of what is available. So a difficult situation, undoubtedly, working very hard to make it better, and trying to get make sure we deliver to where it is most needed."
"317","Rishi Sunak: (12:38);Brilliant. Thank you. Does that, Hugh, answer the question?"
"318","Hugh Pym: (12:42);Yeah. A quick follow up. On a business issue, chancellor, some small businesses say they’re finding difficulty accessing loans. Are you considering extending the scheme and raising the government guarantees?"
"319","Rishi Sunak: (12:56);Thank you for the question. So I think on question of the guarantees, I’m not persuaded that moving to 100% guarantee is the right thing to do. I think if you take a step back and look at the sum total of everything we’ve done to support business, we’ve done a lot of direct cash support in the form of cash grants that are going to businesses, we’ve obviously cut business rates for a large number of businesses. So a million different businesses in each of those are benefiting. We’re paying statutory sick pay bills, and of course, we have a very generous furlough scheme to help businesses."
"320","Rishi Sunak: (13:25);Now some people have made some comparisons with what’s going on in other countries. I think when you look at the totality of what we’re doing, it’s more significant in scope and scale than most of those other countries and indeed where they have used loan guarantees that are different to ours, they’ve done it partly because they’re not doing some of the other things we’re doing. For example, the furlough scheme, or indeed the direct cash grants. But if people are asking the question, would that help speed up delivery of the loans? Then I’m very sympathetic to that and I also want to see that."
"321","Rishi Sunak: (13:56);I’m pleased to tell you now, the latest data I have, is that 12,000 loans have now gone out to small businesses. That’s more than double where it was a week ago, which was double where it was a week before. I think 35,000 or so applications have been made. The acceptance rates seems to be running 80 to 90%, so I think where the signs of progress there, which I’m watching very carefully, and also, working with the British Business Bank of banks to see if there are any other elements of the process that we can streamline, simplify, or strip out bureaucracy. There are a couple of operational tweaks that I won’t bore you with that we have made just recently that will also help. But rest assured I’m watching it very carefully to ensure that credit gets to the businesses that do need."
"322","Rishi Sunak: (14:38);Could we go next to Robert Peston from ITV."
"323","Robert Peston: (14:42);Good afternoon to you. The ONS seemed to indicate today with its data that your deaths in hospitals are under-reporting the totality of deaths from COVID-19 by as much as 40%. Do you think that is right? Do you think that we will, when we get to it at the end of this, see the death rate roughly 40% odd, higher than the numbers you’ve reported so far from hospitals?"
"324","Robert Peston: (15:16);The governor of the Bank of England does think that 100% guarantees would massively, or significantly, increase the volume of loans to small businesses. Why do you disagree with him chancellor? And finally, the prime minister appears to be signaling from his convalescence that we will be living with something pretty close to the kind of lockdown we’ve got at the moment for many weeks and months. Can you confirm that?"
"325","Rishi Sunak: (15:41);Thanks Robert. Let me address the last two of those questions. I think what the governor of the Bank of England was saying was that it’s important to get credit flowing to companies. There are different ways to do that. As I reiterated in my answer to Hugh, there’s of course things we can do to make sure that the speed of the loan program is improved and that’s what we’ve put in place over the past week or two. There’s also just direct cash support that we’ve done for businesses. I think what he also said was, yeah, there’s obviously a fiscal cost to all of these things and it’s important to be mindful of that. I think the scale of the intervention we’ve done, fiscally, as I said, is more significant than almost any other developed country and I think we’ve done it in a targeted and effective way that will be most beneficial to businesses."
"326","Rishi Sunak: (16:26);To your second question, as I said, we’ve been very clear. At this stage of the crisis, we are absolutely focused on sticking to the guidance. The First Secretary set out five tests last week, for us to think about moving to the next stage, we are not there yet, and so it’s very clear that for now what we should focus on is following the guidance, staying at home to protect the NHS, and I think, anything else that people might be speculating on is wrong, we’re crystal clear on that message, and then perhaps on the data. Yvonne, would that be for you to handle? Thank you."
"327","Yvonne Doyle: (16:59);Thank you chancellor. So Robert, yes, undoubtedly the hospital data do not tell the whole story of total deaths, and this week, as for last week, we will have a comprehensive view of that later in the week from ONS. I don’t know if whether 40% is a correct figure. I couldn’t really say that, but I would expect more. We know now from looking at the pattern that nine out of 10 deaths do occur in hospital. What I do feel is that the burden of mortality outside of hospital isn’t evenly distributed throughout the country. It will mirror where, for instance, there may be more care homes or more hospices, so we will see an uneven pattern of that. But we will certainly know for sure later this week what the comprehensive number is."
"328","Rishi Sunak: (17:44);Great. Thank you Yvonne. Thank you. Robert. Could we turn next to Beth Rigby from Sky?"
"329","Beth Rigby: (17:49);Thank you chancellor. A question first for Professor Dawn, if I may. Some of the bodies representing medics are deeply concerned that Public Health England have downgraded PPE guidelines on Friday, based on the availability of equipment rather than safety standards. Do you acknowledge that NHS staff are potentially risking their own safety to look after patients and just to the chancellor, you’ve put the furlough scheme in place until June, you now have some idea of take up. Can you give us an estimate of the cost and will you extend it further if necessary?"
"330","Rishi Sunak: (18:30);Thanks Beth. I’d say we don’t have an estimate of take-up. Yeah, it’s just the first day that the scheme is opened and as I said, I expect those numbers to continue to increase over the coming days and I’ll provide regular updates on them. I think the OBR set out an estimate of costs last week, which I would refer you to, and we did extend it last week. Given where we are and given where we are in the crisis, and given where we are in the state of the economy, thought that was the right decision to provide some longterm certainty for businesses and security for their employees. I can’t tell you now what the future will look like. We keep these things under constant review and it will depend on the evolution of how we move through this crisis and move to the next phase."
"331","Rishi Sunak: (19:12);I think with your specific question on PPE, Yvonne will answer, though I would say, I think in all cases, we’ve taken advice and guidance that is in line with the WHO, the CDC, and Public Health England. But I’ll let Yvonne answer."
"332","Yvonne Doyle: (19:25);Thank you. Absolutely, chancellor. Thank you Beth. So the guidance remains exactly the same. What has happened over the weekend is to cover people really and give them some security in exceptional circumstances. Advice has been produced, jointly with the NHS, about how to be safe in circumstances where supplies may be at risk, and that is a very precautionary set of advice. It’s quite the opposite to putting people at risk because there aren’t enough supplies, it’s trying to ensure that people are well secured, unsafe when there may not be enough supplies, and it also stresses how important …"
"333","Yvonne Doyle: (20:03);… it is not to take risks and when it is not right to do certain things in practice with the PPE. So, it’s very important that people understand what that is actually saying and it is advice that guidance has not been downgraded."
"334","Rishi Sunak: (20:18);Is that clear, Beth?"
"335","Beth: (20:20);Yeah. Just to follow up, professor [inaudible 00:00:26], just medics have told me that they feel that the guidelines are based on availability of equipment, not on safety standards and they feel nervous. Can you understand why some NHS workers might feel if they go to work and they haven’t got the equipment, they just can’t stay in that environment?"
"336","Yvonne Doyle: (20:42);Of course, I understand people’s anxieties on the front line where they’re in a very uncertain situation, but I would stress again that the advice has been put out precisely to give them some information in those circumstances about what is the right and what is not the right thing to do. And it is built entirely on the guidance that exists and it is consistent with what the WHO/CDC say in exceptional circumstances should be done."
"337","Rishi Sunak: (21:09);Thank you, everyone. Thanks, Beth. Can we go next to Andy Bell from channel five?"
"338","Andy Bell: (21:11);Yes. Thank you very much. And really just to follow up on that. So, if a worker in a care home for instance, or if a doctor or a nurse in the NHS says, “I am not prepared to go into my work because I’m not satisfied I have the correct PPE that is appropriate,” would you support their decision not to go in?"
"339","Yvonne Doyle: (21:35);So, in these circumstances, it’s very difficult to give local advice in a local circumstance. But what we’re very clear with guidance is that the guidance tells you what is the right thing to do and what is safe. And that is very much then based on people’s judgment of that, it’s use, the risk assessment they’re in. So certainly, and people have to make their decisions based on whether they are in a risky situation or not. And it’s very difficult to legislate for all of that from a distance here, but just to say the guidance is very clear on what is safe and what is not safe to do."
"340","Andy Bell: (22:11);Thank you. [crosstalk 00:22:13]."
"341","Yvonne Doyle: (22:11);Follow up?"
"342","Andy Bell: (22:13);Follow up. Yeah, and can I also ask you, chancellor, as the representative of the government to answer the question as well. It’s not necessarily the local advice, it’s the principle. That if somebody feels they’ve been put in that position, is it okay for them to say that and would you support that?"
"343","Rishi Sunak: (22:29);Well look, they of course should talk to their local managers who would be better placed to advise than I on exactly the local circumstances. What we have put in place is a hotline that anyone can call to alert us to any supply issues with PPE, which I think has been well publicized and everyone who’s on the frontline should be aware of that. But very much as I reiterated before, we are determined to do everything we can to support those NHS and social care workers on the frontline to make sure that they feel safe in doing the vital job that they are doing. And as I said, we are doing absolutely everything we can on the sourcing side to get them the equipment they need and they can rest assured that we will just work night and day to do exactly that. Thank you, Andy. Can we go next to Richard Partington, the Guardian?"
"344","Richard Partington: (23:15);Hi there, good evening. Thank you very much. I’m going to ask about the economy here, chancellor. The former prime minister Tony Blair says he is terrified about the longterm economic consequences of the lockdown measures. Do you share that concern? And reports over the weekend suggested that treasury analysis shows there’ll be more permanent damage to the economy than the OBR might. Do you believe there will be a deep and U-shaped recession if lockdown goes on for longer than three weeks and what efforts would you like to see for the lockdown to be lifted and how long will that take?"
"345","Rishi Sunak: (23:52);Thanks, Richard. Let me try and answer all three of those together. So, I think in terms of what do we need to see in order for the lockdown to be lifted, I think that’s been very clear. First, secretary of state set out five tasks. I reiterated those. The most important is the last one that we can’t have a risk of a second peak. That would not just be bad for health outcomes, that would also be very bad for the economy. So, I would urge people to consider that and we clearly have not passed those tests yet, which is why it’s important that we stick with the existing rules around social distancing. And to the other questions, all I say is the OBR themselves said we’re in a very uncertain place as to know exactly what will happen to here."
"346","Rishi Sunak: (24:32);You would expect any responsible chancellor to make sure that we have plans in place for a range of different scenarios. That’s of course what we do and that’s what I’m doing. But what I would say is that the important thing now is to put in place interventions that will help bridge through this difficult period to make sure that recovery, when it comes, is as strong as it possibly can be. And an intervention most significantly, like the furloughing scheme, the job retention scheme today, that’s a million people who otherwise might well have been laid off but instead are still attached to their employer ready to go back to work when we get through this. Those are the kinds of things that we’re doing that I think will make a real difference and ensure that our recovery is as strong as it possibly can be. But as I said, this will be a challenging period. We’re not going to be able to save every single job or every single business, but I am confident that the measures we’ve put in place will allow us to come out of this and get back to normal as quickly as possible. Thank you. If we could go next to Torcuil Crighton from the Daily Record?"
"347","Torcuil Crighton: (25:37);Thank you, chancellor. Chancellor, you’ve said your business and job supports package is amongst the best in the world, but you’re leaving behind thousands of workers who are self employed on a far from perfect job retention scheme. The Center for Economic and Business Research forecasts every household will be 515 pounds worse off every month for the next three months. Do you hear Labor’s calls for universal credit to be reformed so the payments are immediate, so the advanced loans are paid off. And SNP calls for a better deal for the self employed, because when you say you can’t help everyone it doesn’t sound fair. It sounds callous."
"348","Rishi Sunak: (26:16);Thank you, Torcuil. With regard to the self employed actually in other countries, not every single country has a scheme for self employed people because of the complexity of dealing with it. I think our scheme covers 95% of those people who are majority self employed and who we have information on. And I think when we put the scheme in place in conjunction with all the various trade associations representing self-employed, it was an accepted principle that of course we could only design a scheme to get money to people who we had tax records and information about. Otherwise, any scheme would be then open to enormous abuse and fraud, and that was a pretty accepted principle. We started with that base. We said we want to protect people who are mainly self-employed, that means people who make the majority of their income from self- employment, and of those we’ve protected 95%. That’s almost 4 million people who will at the beginning of June be able to apply and then receive payments in exactly the same way as those who were employed. 80% of their average self employment income over the past few years, up to a maximum of $2,500 a month. So, we’ve actually tried to treat them in the same way as possible and that will be up and running reasonably soon."
"349","Rishi Sunak: (27:24);With regard to universal credit, what I would say is you talk about the way it is possible for everybody to get payments on day one from the beginning. That system has been up in place for a while to make sure people can get that advanced payment and they don’t have to wait. That’s something the work and pension secretary has been very clear about and implementing, removing the requirement for people to physically attend a job center so they can do it easily and quickly on the phone. And also, we have injected about 7 billion pounds into the welfare system to strengthen not just universal credit, but employment support allowance, the local housing allowance to support renters. All of those aspects of the welfare system have been strengthened so that the safety net there will be stronger for people who need to rely on it. So, whether it’s the furlough scheme, the self-employment scheme or the interventions on the welfare side, I feel confident saying that we have taken extraordinary and unprecedented steps to provide as big a safety net for as many people as is practically possible. Hopefully, that deals with your three questions. Can we go next to Liam Thorpe from the Liverpool Echo?"
"350","Liam Thorpe: (28:32);Good afternoon and thanks for having me. My first question is to professor MacLean. On the 11th of March, Liverpool hosted a champions league match with Athletico Madrid in which 3000 football [inaudible 00:28:45] from Madrid traveled across several major international transport hubs, despite there being a major outbreak of coronavirus in Madrid at the time that had left many people dead. On the same day, the deputy CMO Jenny Harries said that the advice was that large events like this would not have a big impact on the transmission of the virus, and obviously [inaudible 00:29:08] festival went ahead as well. We’ve since in Liverpool seen a real surge in deaths. We have 250 people died in hospital, many more in the community and the Madrid mayor has now come out and said that hosting that specific football match at that time was a real mistake. I was just wondering if considering the advice then changed and mass gatherings were then banned, if the government is now prepared to accept that that was a mistake and that that match and other events around the time should never have gone ahead?"
"351","Liam Thorpe: (29:33);And quickly for the chancellor, if I may, Liverpool council like many town halls across the country seem to very much bear the brunt of the austerity agenda that followed the last financial crash. As I’m sure you will accept, councils across the country, particularly when it comes to social care, are really stepping up and leading the charge in communities in tackling the coronavirus. I was wondering if you could give a cast iron guarantee to counsel, to town halls, to local leaders that they will not be the ones to pay the ultimate price when it comes to the economic-"
"352","Liam Thorpe: (30:03);… impact and that they will get a fair funding settlement that won’t put the people that they care for at more risk."
"353","Rishi Sunak: (30:10);Angela, did you want to start with the question?"
"354","Angela Maclean: (30:11);I’m genuinely sad to hear that so many people in Liverpool have been unwell and so many have died. I think the question you raised really has to be put into the context of what was the general policy at the time, so if were at a bit of our recent history where we were living our lives as normal, in that circumstance, going to a football match is not a particularly large extra risk. However, once you get to a situation of our strange lives as we live them now, where we spend all our time basically at home, of course you wouldn’t add on an extra risk of lots and lots of people all going off to the same place at the same time."
"355","Angela Maclean: (30:48);I think it would be very interesting to see in the future when all the science has done, what relationship there is between the viruses that have circulated in Liverpool and the viruses that are circulated in Spain. That’s certainly an interesting hypothesis you raised there."
"356","Rishi Sunak: (31:01);Liam, yeah, I can address your other question. I used to be a local government minister, so I know firsthand the incredible work that councils up and down the country do, and they have risen to the challenge of tackling this emergency amazingly well. We absolutely want to support them during this period and get them the resources that they need. My colleague, the local government secretary just this weekend, announced 1.6 billion pounds in incremental funding for local authorities. That brings the total extra funding that we’ve provided during this crisis to over 3 billion pounds, to provide extra resources to them to help them get through, provide the extra services they are."
"357","Rishi Sunak: (31:39);And demonstrates I think our commitment to stand shoulder to shoulder with all those people on the front line, whether they’re our local government, public servants or indeed those in our NHS. So I said, hopefully, we’ve delivered on our commitment and we’ll continue to do so to support local government. Sorry, did you have a follow up, Liam?"
"358","Liam Thorpe: (32:01);Just as the government representative here, looking back at the first question I asked there, considering that the guidance changed and mass gatherings were banned, do you think the government was too slow to cancel major sporting fixtures like football matches and the Cheltenham Festival and we may now be seeing the effect of that?"
"359","Rishi Sunak: (32:18);I mean, I echo what Angela said. At every stage in this crisis, we have been guided by the scientific advice and have been making the right decisions at the right time. And it’s important, if you listen to Angela and her colleagues that that’s what we do. There’s often a wrong time to put certain measures in place thinking about sustainability and everything else. And at all parts of this, we’ve been guided by that science, we’ve been guided by making the right decisions at the right time, and I stand by that. But more generally, of course as Michael Gove said yesterday, this is an unprecedented situation that we’re all dealing with."
"360","Rishi Sunak: (32:55);I’m sure there are all things that we will learn from this as I’ve been very about, but in terms of the guidance that we put in place, I believe it was the right guidance at the right time based on the scientific advice that we were provided with. And then Michael Stothard from Sifted."
"361","Michael S.: (33:14);I’ve got two economic questions about the startup fund and then one for Angela Maclean if you’ll permit me. First question for the chancellor, this Futures Fund will likely mean that the UK government will for pretty much the first time own equity stakes in a large number of UK startups. It’s seemingly a move towards a more French and German approach where the state has regularly taken XD stakes to help startups. So my question is, do you believe this new equity owning approach is strictly temporary due to the crisis or does this signal a broader shift in government policy towards startups with taking equity, a new tool that’s now really in play for the government?"
"362","Michael S.: (33:55);The second just economic question, Sifted is a startup itself where new media by the Financial Times writing about startups. We know firsthand that a lot of startups run with very short cash runways. There’s obviously been some criticism of the British Business Bank in terms of delivering on some of the other funds. What assurances can you give to startups that this money will come quickly because six months may be too late for a lot of [inaudible 00:34:26] startups. And then finally sort of just for Angela Maclean on a totally different topic, the deputy governor of the Bank of England today said it wasn’t clear if people would return to a normal life, even after restrictions are lifted."
"363","Michael S.: (34:44);People are clearly very scared. Do you have any behavioral modeling which could predict how people will respond when the lockdown is eventually relaxed?"
"364","Rishi Sunak: (34:56);Thanks Michael. Angela, do want to go first and then I can conclude?"
"365","Angela Maclean: (35:01);That’s a terrific question. We certainly spend a lot of time speaking to behavioral scientists, behavioral scientists on SAGE. We have a whole subgroup called SPY-B which is full of behavioral scientists and everything we do, we talk to them very carefully about what they expect to happen. And they’re very terrific, very careful scientists and I honestly think if they were here now, they would say these are unprecedented times. That makes it really quite difficult to predict how people will behave in the future. So I’m very happy to go in and ask them if they are thinking about… Mostly what they do is look for data that can help us think through how people will behave given how they behave in the past and how much people will go back to work, when and if it becomes available, I think it will be a very hard thing to predict given just what strange days we’re in."
"366","Rishi Sunak: (36:01);Thanks Angela. Michael, thanks for your questions. You’re absolutely right on the first one. This is not something that we’ve done before. So in that sense, it is innovative. I would say it’s a very specific response to the unprecedented circumstances that we find ourselves in, which is why I think it’s the right decision to take a slightly different approach. Historically, we have channeled government funding through British patient capital, as you would know, into actual funds to fill that gap, and that’s worked well for us. I would say, the UK is like a European startup success story in terms of the amount of venture capital raised, in terms of new companies created and the ones that scale up more than most of Europe put together."
"367","Rishi Sunak: (36:39);So historically, we haven’t needed to do something like this and in time, it may well be that we don’t need to have this intervention as things get back to normal. But of course, it’s something we’ll keep in review now that we have it and we’ll be able to see how it performs. But as I said, it is designed to support what I think is one of the most dynamic parts of our economy and will be vital for getting us out of this and getting growth back onto an upward trajectory, which is why I thought it was the right thing to do today. In terms of your second question on timing, six months, the scheme will be open until the end of September. It will actually be up and running in May."
"368","Rishi Sunak: (37:15);And the term sheet for the convertible loan product that we will match fond is available online at the gov.uk website. So for those people who think they might need to raise capital, I’d say, go and have a look at that term sheet if you think it might make sense for you, start putting your round together confident that this will be up and running in May and then we’ll be there ready to provide the capital that you require to drive your growth into the future, whether that’s you at Sifted or any of the other startups that might be benefiting from the scheme. And I think with that, we are at the end. So thank you very much. Thank you Angela and Yvonne and everyone. As always, please, thank you for your compliance with the social distancing guidelines."
"369","Rishi Sunak: (38:02);Please do follow the rules. There is, as the First Secretary said, light at the end of the tunnel, but we are not there yet so we must remember to stay at home, protect the NHS and save lives. Thank you."
"370","Speaker 3: (38:14);So the latest of the official daily news conferences at number 10 Downing Street, live the pictures for you from inside number 10. And Rishi Sunak, the chancellor with two of the most senior government advisors there on science and health. Light at the end of the tunnel, he said quoting Dominic Raab, but saying that to say the least, we’re not there yet. So let’s have a reminder of the main points from that briefing, which took around 40 minutes. The latest figures show that a further 449 people have died in hospitals in the UK, having tested positive for coronavirus and that brings the total number of deaths so far in the UK to 16, 509."
"371","Speaker 3: (39:03);And addressing one of the most pressing issues, the shortage of personal protective equipment for staff in the NHS and in the care sector, the chancellor said it was an international-"
"372","Matt Hancock: (06:29);Good afternoon, and welcome to the Downing Street coronavirus daily briefing. I’m joined by the Deputy Chief Medical Officer, Professor Van-Tam and by Professor John Newton. At the heart of our plan, is ensuring that NHS capacity is always ahead of need. This means that if you or someone you love needs hospital care with COVID-19, then you’ll always get that care. If God forbid you need care in an intensive care unit, then you will have that bed and the life-saving equipment and team that you need. The latest figures show another record high of 2,963 spare critical care beds available across the NHS. We said at the start of this, that our primary goal in our battle plan, was to slow the spread and protect the NHS by flattening the curve and increasing capacity. That plan is working. At no point in this crisis has anyone who could benefit from critical care been denied that care, because there weren’t enough staff or beds or ventilators to treat them. But there is much further to go."
"373","Matt Hancock: (07:51);On the most recent figures, 535,342 tests have now been carried out in the UK, excluding Northern Ireland. Of these, 129,044 have tested positive. The number of patients in hospital with COVID-19 symptoms, is now down to 17,681. 17,366 people, have sadly died in hospital, which is an increase of 852. This number is another salutary lesson, and it tells us of the deadly nature of this virus. We owe it to them and to ourselves not to throw away the progress we’ve made so far. We have been clear that we will not risk lives by relaxing the social distancing rules before our five tests have been met. First, that the NHS can continue to cope. Second, that the operational challenges commitment. Third, that the daily death rate falls sustainably and consistently. Fourth, that the rate of infection is decreasing. And most importantly, that there is no risk of a second peak. I now want to update you on two specific areas of huge importance. First, PPE."
"374","Matt Hancock: (09:26);Protective equipment delivery, is an operation of unprecedented scale and complexity. Since the start of the crisis, we’ve now delivered over a billion items of PPE. We start… We’re constantly working to improve that delivery system, buying PPE for a brand around the world and working to make more here at home. We have a diverse range of suppliers and we’re working day and night to expand that supply base. We’re in direct talks with the factories that actually produce the PPE and the fabric that it’s made of. This is proved one of the most fruitful avenues, and I want to especially thank my foreign office and DIT colleagues, especially in China, for the incredible work making these connections. I also want to thank the enormous response we’ve had from our appeal for companies to come forward to help replenish stocks. As of yesterday, we’ve had 8,331 offers of PPE equipment, and we’re investigating each and every one of those many leads. Now of course, some of these leads have led to very large scale purchases of many millions of items. But the reality is that, not each of them… Not everyone who approaches us, can deliver on their offers in scale. I’m very grateful to all those who have come forward. And we are now actively engaged with thousands of these companies, and I can announce that we’re working with 159 potential UK manufacturers which are starting to come on stream. I’ve said many times that I am determined to get people the PPE that they need. This is a 24/7 operation. It’s one of the biggest cross government operations I’ve ever seen. And I’m grateful to colleagues from the NHS, from Public Health England, the Crown Commercial Service, Cabinet Office, Communities Department, the Ministry of Defense, the Armed Forces, the Devolved Administrations, and the territorial offices, the Business Department, the treasury, the foreign office, and the Department for International Trade, for their enormous hard work on this. And I’m also very grateful to Lord Deighton, who delivered The Olympics, for stepping forward to lead this national effort and deliver once again for his country."
"375","Matt Hancock: (11:47);The second area I want to talk about, is the vaccines. In the long run, the best way to defeat coronavirus is through a vaccine. After all, this is a new disease. This is uncertain science, but I’m certain that we will throw everything we’ve got at developing a vaccine. The UK is at the forefront of the global effort. We’ve put more money than any other country into the global search for a vaccine. And for all the efforts around the world, two of the leading vaccine developments, are taking place here at home at Oxford and Imperial. Both of these promising projects are making rapid progress. And I’ve told the scientists leading them that we’ll do everything in our power to support. First, I’m today making £22.5 million available to the Imperial Project to support their phase two clinical trials, which are going to assess a sample of several thousand and for them to begin the work on subsequently a very large phase three trial."
"376","Matt Hancock: (12:57);Second, I’m today making available £20 million to the Oxford team to fund their clinical trials. The team have accelerated that trials process, working with the regulator, the MHRA, who have been absolutely brilliant. And as a result, I can announce that the vaccine from the Oxford project will be trialed in people from this Thursday. In normal times, reaching this stage would take years. And I’m very proud of the work taken so far. At the same time, we’ll invest in manufacturing capability. So that if either of these vaccines safely works, then we can make it available for the British people as soon as humanly possible. Nothing about this process is certain. Vaccine development is a process of trial and error and trial again, that’s the nature of how vaccines are developed. But I’ve told Sarah Gilbert and Robin Shattock…"
"377","Matt Hancock: (14:03);But, told Sara Gilbert and Robyn Shattuck, two of our most inspiring scientists that we are going to back then to the hilt and give them every resource that they need to get the best possible chance of success as soon as possible. After all, the upside of being the first country in the world to develop a successful vaccine is so huge that I am throwing everything at it. Coronavirus is a powerful enemy, but I believe that the power of human ingenuity is stronger. Every day the science gets better. We gather more information, we understand more about how to defeat the virus. But in the meantime there’s one thing that you can do and that is to stay at home, to protect the NHS and save lives. Thank you very much. I’m now going to ask Professor Van-Tam take us through the daily statistics."
"378","Professor Jonathan Van-Tam: (15:04);Thank you, Secretary of State. I’ll begin with a slide that you’ve seen many times before. I don’t apologize for showing it again. It is important that we continue to monitor the extent to which the British people are following the social distancing advice and in this case, referring to the slide, not traveling. And you can see a range of indicators there from all private motor vehicles, through buses and tubes in London, through to buses and national rail in the whole of the UK. And you can see a very clear prolongation of these low trends of usage compared to where we were in the middle of March. This is a good sign. It shows that we are continuing to follow the advice given to us by the government, and that in doing so, we will get on top of the current wave of the coronavirus threat and we will begin to turn the curve. Next slide, please."
"379","Professor Jonathan Van-Tam: (16:12);This next slide, again you have seen before, shows the new cases diagnosed in the UK. The dates along the bottom of the slide … for that individual work completed. And you can see of course that there is some day-to-day variation, but the numbers have remained high and it isn’t clear that there is an enormous downturn at this point, so the numbers are varying day-to-day, but they remain high and we remain in a situation of danger that we must take very seriously indeed. You will see as the slide progresses from left to right, the proportion of orange beginning to show greater and greater. This is a distinction between the NHS and Public Health England, capacity and testing in blue, and the coming on stream of commercial testing to supplement that as time goes by across the slide. Next slide, please."
"380","Professor Jonathan Van-Tam: (17:19);Now, this is a very important slide. And of course, refers to total number of people in hospital in Great Britain with COVID-19. And you can see a variety of curves here from the top one, referring to London, through the other curves referring to the different regions of England, Scotland, Wales. And what you can see is that there, in terms of the number of people in hospital, there has been a peak in London. It was probably around the 10th of April, that kind of date. And since then there has been a decline. But in the other parts of the graph, that is to say Scotland, Wales, and the other regions in England, I suggest to you that there is rather more of a plateau than anything else at this point in time."
"381","Professor Jonathan Van-Tam: (18:14);It is not absolutely clear that there have been peaks, nor is it absolutely clear that the number of cases is dropping in the same way that we can illustrate it on the slide for London. So again, this is important. It shows the regional variations in how the virus has been affecting the UK. It shows that we are not out of danger at this point. And that the curve is flat, but not very clearly going down in many parts of the country. I’m sure it will go down in the days and weeks that follow, but we must keep pushing on this and we must bend that curve through our actions. Next slide, please. Now, here you see a slide that arrays data by week, on the 20th of March through to the 10th of April. And it shows you, first of all, deaths in hospital from COVID-19, those are the blue columns on the graph. Those are by date of report in the hospital. And the orange bars show the all weekly registered deaths registered to the Office For National Statistics and those are by date of registration. And please be very careful in comparing these statistics, because as you will know, unfortunately if you’ve lost someone, it takes a while for a death certificate to be issued and for that to be registered with the Office For National Statistics. So there is inevitably some difference between those two bars. And we are not comparing apples with apples. We’re comparing apples with pears on this particular slide. But it does, I hope, help you understand the trends in the mortality data and we need to see that turn."
"382","Professor Jonathan Van-Tam: (20:16);We’ll have to wait a little longer, but we need to see that turn. Thank you. Finally, I will show you a slide I’ve shown you before about global death comparisons. Again, as I’ve said before, the slide is indexed on time 0.0 when a country declares its first 50 cumulative deaths. Now, for almost all of the countries on this slide, the reporting, as in the UK, has been for hospital deaths. And you can see that there are broadly three patterns. The United States on its own, the European countries, other than Germany, in the middle of the pack, and some outliers who’ve had very low rates of death."
"383","Professor Jonathan Van-Tam: (21:12);On this slide, if you look carefully, you will see a curve for UK hospitals only and a UK all settings, which has lagged further behind. Which includes all of the deaths reported to the ONS. But, you will see that they are on the same trajectory within the same framing of those middle countries. These are important comparisons, but what will be really important in the future, and we do not yet have those data, are international comparisons of excess deaths, particularly across Europe where a pretty standardized methodology is used for counting excess deaths. But, those data take time to assemble and I don’t have them for you today. Thank you, Secretary."
"384","Matt Hancock: (22:00);Okay, thanks very much indeed, Jonathan. First question is going to be from Laura Kuenssberg at the BBC."
"385","Laura Kuenssberg: (22:09);Thank you, Secretary of State. Just on PPE, this was declared a pandemic well over a month ago. Why is the government still having to scramble now to get our health workers the equipment they need and allowing UK firms we’ve been hearing from today who could supply British hospitals and care homes to sell their products abroad?"
"386","Matt Hancock: (22:29);Well as you know, Laura, we’ve been pushing at making sure that we get PPE to the front line, to the people who need it since right at the start of this crisis, and especially since the big increase in demand about a month ago. We’ve now shipped over a billion items and we’re also at the same time replenishing the stocks on a 24/7 basis. And I’ve described something of the operation to do that. And we bought a huge proportion of that from overseas, and that will continue to make sure that alongside making more PPE here, we also buy it from the big producers, especially in China. And that’s where the big numbers are. Making sure that we get that PPE into the country, out to the front line where it’s needed."
"387","Laura Kuenssberg: (23:29);Can I come back in?"
"388","Matt Hancock: (23:34);Okay."
"389","Laura Kuenssberg: (23:36);Day after day we’re hearing from people on the front line that they do not have enough. I mean, how do you explain the gap between what you’re saying about getting everything in place and what people who are working on wards or working in care homes are actually experiencing? And why did ministers suggest there was some kind of mix up about not taking part in the EU scheme to get medical kit, when the most senior civil servant of the foreign office said this afternoon, “It was a political decision,” to use his phrase?"
"390","Matt Hancock: (24:04);Well, I haven’t seen that exchange. But, I have spoken to the foreign secretary. And as far as I’m aware, there was no political decision not to participate in that scheme. When we did receive an invitation in the Department of Health, because it came to the Department of Health. It was put up to me to be asked and we joined. So we are now members of that scheme. However, as far as I know, that scheme hasn’t yet delivered a single item of PPE. So I think the most important thing that we concentrate on is what are the offers that can get us the most PPE to be able to get it into the country, to be able to manufacture it here and to be able to then get it out to the front line. And we’re doing everything we possibly can to make that happen. Robert Peston, ITV."
"391","Matt Hancock: (24:59);You are muted."
"392","Robert Peston: (25:02);Okay. Can you hear me now?"
"393","Matt Hancock: (25:05);Yes."
"394","Robert Peston: (25:06);Good afternoon. Is it correct that you’re not ready to change your advice on the usefulness of the general public in wearing masks because you don’t want to deprive healthcare workers masks? And secondly, you have dramatically increased the capacity to test. We’re up to the capacity of 40,000 a day, but only 20,000 are actually happening. There seems to be a problem of actually carrying out the tests and then delivering the swabs to the labs. We’ve spoken at ITV to care homes who say they are too far from the test centers and they’re not getting enough help when it comes to testing their residents."
"395","Matt Hancock: (25:48);Yes. Well look, on both points on the use of face masks, we are advised by the science and we’ve been asked this question many times in this form and we listened to what the scientists say. There was a meeting of Sage that I think addressed this question earlier today. I look forward to hearing from that and then to ministers making decisions based on the science, as always. And on the question of tests, I think it’s terrific. I might bring John Newton in, in a minute, but it’s terrific that we have managed to increase capacity to over 39,000 tests a day, which is higher than our planned trajectory. Of course, having excess capacity means that we can then expand who that capacity can be used by. And also exactly as you say, increase the availability to more people, make it easier to access. So one example is that we have introduced home testing where a test can be sent out and taken, and then returned so that the individual doesn’t need to move. And obviously home testing will be particularly helpful to those living in care homes."
"396","Matt Hancock: (27:11);For whom, exactly as you say, a trip to a drive through testing center might be a difficult thing to do. John."
"397","John Newton: (27:18);Thank you, Secretary of State. Yes, capacity has gone up dramatically and in fact it’s going to continue going up a lot quite soon. So we can now say we are meeting the requirement in hospitals. We’re also meeting the requirement to test NHS and care staff with the drive-in centers. We’ve tested over 100,000 staff and many of those have gone back to work. And in fact, NHS sickness absent rates are now falling as a result. So, that’s very good news. We’re now progressively expanding the access. So you’re quite right. The drive-in centers are not necessarily ideal for people working in a distributed system like the care sector. Although, access is available in NHS labs and NHS settings, which is very widely distributed, we’re piloting a number of different ways-"
"398","John Newton: (28:03);… which is very widely distributed. We’re piloting a number of different ways of getting tests out to people, both directly sending swabs to care homes, also Secretary of State mentioned testing at home, and also mobile delivery, so there are a number of ways we can get the swabs to the people rather than expecting the people to come to the swabs."
"399","Matt Hancock: (28:21);Does that satisfy you, Robert?"
"400","Robert: (28:22);If I could just ask, I suppose Jonathan [Van Time 00:28:25] would be best on this. Is the priority when it comes to face masks, frankly, healthcare workers, and although there may be a case for the general public using them at some point, this would just not be the right moment?"
"401","Professor Jonathan Van-Tam: (28:38);Thank you for the question, Robert. I think I can reply on four points. The first thing to say is I have always said to you that we will keep the evidence under review and we are absolutely doing that. I’ve also said to you that we will change if we feel that the evidence is driving us that way, and we will advise ministers accordingly. SAGE has indeed met today and discussed personal protective equipment, and advice will go to ministers in due course. I’m not going to comment about that any further today, nor would you expect me to."
"402","Professor Jonathan Van-Tam: (29:15);What I can say is that there is an absolutely engineering principle here that SAGE places great value and prime importance on never jeopardizing the supplies of PPE to our health and social care workers, and that is a line we are not going to cross under any circumstances."
"403","Matt Hancock: (29:38);Thanks, Robert. Victoria MacDonald, Channel 4."
"404","Victoria MacDonald: (29:42);Thank you, Secretary of State. Just back on PPE, we have talked to a number of suppliers and distributors who have talked a lot about the obstacles they’ve faced of getting through the procurement system. They will send an email, they will make a telephone call, they don’t hear back, then there’ll be asked questions they’ve already answered. Are you satisfied that you are somehow going to clear away those obstacles so that you can increase the supply. And secondly, we’ve heard a lot of numbers over the past few weeks, and today you’ve just talked about 1 billion items of PPE. Now that sounds a lot, but quite clearly it’s not enough. Do you have any idea about what enough would be?"
"405","Matt Hancock: (30:34);Well, yes. The answer on how much is enough PPE is enough to get what is needed according to the guidelines that have been clearly set up by Public Health England, to everyone who it needs it, and it is in the billions of items per month. The numbers of items that are needed are absolutely vast, and hence the need both to manufacture it at home and also to buy it from abroad. We’re always trying to improve the processes that we have in place to make purchases. I think it’s been very encouraging the number of UK companies that have come forward, but we have had to make sure that we sought out the credible offers from those that are not. We’ve had some offers for instance that have come from companies where upon investigation the company has only just been formed in the previous day or two before coming and asking for a cash deal with the government."
"406","Matt Hancock: (31:40);So you’ll understand that there has to be a process in there. Nevertheless, we want to engage with all of those companies who can help us in this national effort, and we are accelerating the progress of getting back to all of those companies with a substantive response to their offer. This is a fast-moving market because essentially the problem on PPE is that there is a global shortage. There is more demand across the world than there is supply, and that means that we need to be as nimble as we possibly can and crucially as much as possible get right to the source of the PPE, which is often in factories in Asia, including in China, rather than going through a middleman, which can seem attractive on the surface, but actually if you get directly to the factory owner, then you get a more secure supply."
"407","Matt Hancock: (32:44);It is a complicated picture. None of this takes away the importance of delivering on this agenda or the resources and the support that we’re throwing at it. Daniel Woodson, Talk Radio."
"408","Daniel Woodson: (32:58);Good afternoon, Secretary of State. A report by the EU agency, the European External Action Service, to be published this week concludes that the official and state-backed Chinese sources are behind the spread of conspiracy narratives designed to exonerate the Chinese government of the coronavirus. The report will say China has run a global disinformation campaign to deflect blame for the outbreak of the pandemic. What is the UK government doing to stop these Chinese disinformation campaigns?"
"409","Matt Hancock: (33:37);Well, I haven’t seen that report, and I haven’t seen any evidence of what you describe, but we have seen more broadly disinformation and disinformation being put about, especially on social media, and tackling that is incredibly important, because what the public wants and what the public should be able to expect, is high quality information, highly factual, even in this uncertain environment, because we’re still learning about the disease, but to be able to be as clear and transparent as possible, and for the government to describe which information we think we have high confidence in and to be able to explain the conclusions we reached from that information. Tackling disinformation is an important part of it, but I’m afraid I can’t comment on the on the specific piece that you refer to. Chris Smith from the Times."
"410","Chris Smith: (34:40);Thank you, Secretary of State. Can I ask about asymptomatic transmission given the need to isolate cases in any easing of restrictions. How big an issue this is going to be in terms of injuring any attempt to ease lockdown and the risk that whatever we do will we could get a second peak because of this? Related to that, can our contacts actually pick up cases when people are not showing any symptoms with any accuracy? Given concerns about transmission in hospitals at the moment, as well as the huge amounts of unused testing capacity we have right now, should we now be screening asymptomatic health staff for the virus?"
"411","Matt Hancock: (35:14);Well, these are very, very good questions. What I’d say is that the fact that this virus appears to have asymptomatic transmission makes it incredibly difficult to deal with and what is one of the central facts of this pandemic that has made it as difficult and as challenging as it is. I’ll ask JVT to answer on the science of the transmission and the asymptomatic transmission in particular, and then John Newton to answer the question on the testing, but these are exactly the right scientific questions that we are also grappling with."
"412","Professor Jonathan Van-Tam: (35:58);Thank you, Secretary of State. You’re absolutely right, and really the Secretary of State has answered the medical question for me."
"413","Matt Hancock: (36:09);Did I get it right?"
"414","Professor Jonathan Van-Tam: (36:11);You did. When we started this crisis, we did not have enough information to understand the extent to which patients who were presymptomatic and asymptomatic were shedding the virus. We now have a lot more information and it is clear that for at least a proportion of patients, they begin to shed the virus before the onset of symptoms. We, of course, have scientific data now that show that some people are asymptomatic and we can still detect the virus using a PCR test. Where the difficulty in the science comes is understanding just how infectious those other people, presymptomatic or asymptomatic, are compared to those who are symptomatic, and remember, they don’t have the cough, they don’t have the respiratory symptoms, they don’t have the same means of expelling the virus to the same amount."
"415","Professor Jonathan Van-Tam: (37:18);I think it’s absolutely impossible to rule out that there are some cases where spread occurs from asymptomatic or presymptomatic people, but the vast majority of the force of transmission in the community is still coming from those people with symptoms. That isn’t to say that we’re not picking up the asymptomatic infections. I hope I’ve been very clear on that. We recognize they exist now, but the extent to which they are the primary problem as opposed to the primary problem for transmission being the people who’ve got the cough, got the fever, and are clearly emitting the virus through coughing and sneezing, they are undoubtedly the biggest route of transmission in our communities. The public health advice remains the same, that the moment you have symptoms of Covid 19, you go home and you begin self-isolation. If you live in a household with others, then you take them with you and the family isolates with you for 14 days."
"416","Matt Hancock: (38:32);Thanks. Professor John Newton."
"417","John Newton: (38:36);Yeah. Thank you. Thank you, Chris for the question. The simple answer is yes, the test will detect the presence of the virus in people who are asymptomatic. One of the ways we’re using the current testing capacity is to do scientific studies to show the spread of the virus in representative populations. We’re ramping up that activity quite a lot to give us more of this sort of information. But it’s already obvious from the early studies that in areas, particular settings where social distancing isn’t possible, particularly closed areas such as in hospitals or in care homes or indeed in prisons, there is a need to go in and do intensive testing to try and understand how many people might be asymptomatic and carrying the virus. Those studies are underway and we’re working closely, particularly with the NHS to design an approach to that."
"418","John Newton: (39:24);Looking to the future, one of the reasons we need a good level of testing capacity is to provide the testing for infection control, so when we do have outbreaks of infection in certain settings, we need to be able to go in and test not just people who are symptomatic, but also people who are asymptomatic. That is what we are doing."
"419","Professor Jonathan Van-Tam: (39:46);Does that satisfy you, Chris?"
"420","Chris Smith: (39:48);Yeah. Can I just pull out, Professor Newton, those early studies you’re … What does that show about the extent of transmission in healthcare settings? Just to clarify the point about screening of NHS staff, can we expect that to make a contribution to meeting the 100,000 target by next week?"
"421","John Newton: (40:05);Well, there’s an international literature which shows, for example, the study from New York in women in maternity setting showing a significant number, a small proportion who were asymptomatic and had positive tests, and we also know from studies that Public Health England has carried out in some care home settings that a number of staff and residents who are asymptomatic have tested positive. So it’s all very consistent internationally. It’s a small proportion. It’s also important to emphasize that the test is not a screen. So the idea that you would use the test to screen the whole population or indeed to screen the whole of the workforce isn’t really how the test could be used. You would test somebody on day one and on day two they might become positive and you wouldn’t know. We use the test to understand the spread of the virus in a population or in a setting in order to be able to put in place the measures required to control that infection. It’s not to be used broadly as a screen. That’s certainly not the current thinking. But as Jonathan has said, it’s very important that we keep an eye on the science, and if the science develops further, then we will need to change our testing strategy, obviously."
"422","Matt Hancock: (41:20);And to answer your question of will we do testing of asymptomatic staff in hospital as part of meeting the 100,000 target by the end of the month, the answer to that is yes, and we have a plan to be able to do that as we expand access to testing to meet the capacity that as we can see from the figures that capacity is increasingly available on the road to 100,000 tests a day. Thanks Chris. Pippa Greer from the Daily Mirror."
"423","Pippa Greer: (41:55);Hello. I’ve actually got a question for Professor Newton, but before I do, Secretary of State, if I could just clarify following on from Laura’s question, the top diplomat at the-"
"424","Speaker 2: (42:03);Hi. I’m following up from [Laura’s 00:42:02] question. The top diplomat at the Foreign Office says we’re not in the EUPP’s scheme and that the decision not to take part was a political one. But now you’re saying it wasn’t a political decision and we are a member of the scheme, which I believe is the first time we’ve heard that. You can’t both be right. Who should we be believing?"
"425","Matt Hancock: (42:25);The invitation, when it came in to the Department for Health, and I know there’s been debate about whether it was sent to the wrong email address initially. But the invitation, when it came to the Department for Health to participate in this scheme in an associate way, because we’re not members of the EU, came to me for decision and I said yes. But having said that, as far as I’m aware, this scheme has not yet delivered any PPE. That’s the decision making process that I was involved in. There was a recommendation and I took the decision in the normal way. That’s the long and short of it. But the impact of this on our ability to deliver PPE is zero. There’s no impact at all because the scheme has not yet made anything available. John. The first … Yes."
"426","John Netwon: (43:22);[crosstalk 00:01:27] asked a question yet."
"427","Speaker 2: (43:31);I haven’t asked a question yet, Mr. Newton, it’s a different subject actually on airports. Hundreds of thousands of people continue to arrive in the UK each week, airports and ports. And countries like Japan and Italy have introduced temperature checks and other forms of screening weeks ago. And in some cases, have quarantine restrictions in place for new arrivals. Just wondering why we haven’t followed a similar route and whether it’s something that we might yet consider?"
"428","John Netwon: (43:52);It’s a larger question really about how we respond in the future to the pandemic. I think I’m going to pass that one to Jonathan because these are exactly the sort of questions that SAGE are considering."
"429","Jonathan: (44:04);So with ports of entry screening, there is a basic problem that the length of a flight from a far flung place to the UK is typically no more than 12 hours. I think we’d agree on that. But the problem is that people can be infected before they get on the fight and the incubation period for this virus is up to 14 days, and it’s typically five days. I can fly back from, well, you choose the country, wherever you like on a long flight and I can become infected in that country before I get on the aircraft. And I will sail through Heathrow with absolutely no symptoms at all. I’m not being untruthful. There’s nothing to declare. I won’t have a fever, I won’t be picked out. But when I get back to my home in the north of England, at that point I may develop symptoms a few days later and go, “I don’t feel too well.” And clearly the port of entry screening hasn’t worked. So that’s the basic mathematical problem that goes with it."
"430","Jonathan: (45:18);Right now though, we are in a situation where you’ve seen from the slides that I showed to you that there is widespread transmission in the UK. We are turning that down, it is clear we are turning it down, but it is still there and it has not gone away. And so the proportion of new cases coming in from abroad, even if flights were operating, would be minuscule compared to the amount of force of infection currently still moving around in our societies in the UK. And that I hope gives you a bit of context for the here and now. We do at some point hope that we turn this curve down and that we then start to think about how and when and how carefully we begin to think about easing some of the restrictions we’re under without letting this virus just chase off again. And that’s a really difficult balancing act and all things will be under consideration, all scientific options will be under consideration at that point. I am sure about that."
"431","Matt Hancock: (46:31);Thanks very much. Geraldine Scott from the Yorkshire Post."
"432","Geraldine Scott: (46:41);Thank you. And Yorkshire’s and [inaudible 00:46:41] opened the NHS Nightingale hospital in Harrogate today. Taking the decision during this crisis declares the veteran GFA helpline, which helps many liken. So will you consider opening that again to help others like Captain [inaudible 00:46:54] as the impact worsens. And secondly, some NHS staff are being threatened with referral to their professional or regulatory bodies who are speaking out by the crisis by Brits, PPE or habits effecting them personally and secretary of state. Is it right, the NHS trust to be doing this? And can you guarantee that no NHS or social care worker will be punished for raising legitimate concerns publicly?"
"433","Matt Hancock: (47:20);Well, yes, of course people should be able to talk about the problems that there are and indeed they do. And I’ve seen both fantastic examples of people saying that they’re working hard on celebrating the fact that they’re… Celebrating’s the wrong word… Of going public with the work they’re doing and the conditions that they’re working under. And I’ve also seen some people, for instance, saying that they’re delighted that there’s good PPE and we’ve also seen people saying that there’s a problem in their area. And I think that’s totally normal and standard. And people should feel free to talk about what happens at work. I think that transparency is important and it’s the sort of approach we’ve tried to take as a government including with press conferences like these. In terms of the veterans UK point, I’m afraid I’ll have to take that away and make sure that somebody gets back to you on the details of it. Because it’s an important area but it’s not one that I got a direct answer to today. Thanks."
"434","Matt Hancock: (48:37);And finally Alastair [Smout 00:48:40] from Reuters."
"435","Speaker 3: (48:43);Secretary of State, you say the plan is working. Yesterday, they PHE medical director at [Mondo 00:48:49] said stop showed about 10% of total COVID-19 deaths taking place outside of hospitals. The OMS figures published today. So the number could be about 40% higher than the daily hospital figure, and it is clear now that the UK staff total could match or even surpass Italy’s to make it the worst hit country in Europe. So it feels like at least compared to large parts of Europe, the plan isn’t working. Who has ultimate responsibility for that?"
"436","Matt Hancock: (49:18);Well thanks for the question. What I’d say is that on the factual points it’s important to get the analysis of those right. And I’ve seen this 40% figure and I asked the team about it before coming here and that is not an accurate representation of those figures. In fact, Professor Van-Tam took us through the important differences between how we measure deaths in hospitals, which we can get that data daily. And so it’s incredibly important for tracking as soon as possible. What’s happening in terms of the impact of this disease with the OMS data, which is measured in a different way. And if the slides can come up again, we can bring the slide up which shows that gap which is around between 20 and 25% in the latest data. All of these information are important. Of course they are, and we take as much information as we possibly can into account when we make decisions and then on the second point is the international comparison. It’s very important again to look at that and taking into account the size of the country and the different characteristics of the different countries. So looking per population is the right way to look at those information."
"437","Matt Hancock: (50:50);The final point I’d make is that at the start of this crisis we said that there were two absolutely critical tasks and they were form parts of the battle plan that we published a long time before the lockdown began, when we published the types of measures we might have to take. One is that we got the exponential nature of this infection under control and brought the curve down. And as you can see from the statistics and that curve is now flat and that means that we have achieved that objective."
"438","Matt Hancock: (51:29);The second thing is that we said that we must do everything we can to ensure the NHS is not overwhelmed and lots of people said that would be impossible, but we have achieved that because every single person who has needed treatment has been able to get that treatment, including with the building of the NHS [Nightingale 00:51:48] hospitals. For instance they were referred to in the previous question because the NHS Nightingale hospital in Harrogate has opened today and that will ensure that there’s more NHS capacity for people of Yorkshire and the Northeast. And therefore on those two core measures the plan is working."
"439","Matt Hancock: (52:11);Now, does that mean that every problem has been addressed? No, of course it doesn’t. I’ve gone through some of the details on PPE today and there are clearly challenges and it doesn’t mean that everything’s done. No, it doesn’t. For instance, the search for a vaccine is absolutely a top priority. I’m delighted that the first vaccines in this country will go into a human clinical trials on Thursday. So there is a huge amount still to do, but on the absolutely central core objectives that we faced as a country, thanks to the work of the NHS, the armed forces, many, many others and the people who have stayed at home, we have managed to both bend down the curve and also ensure that the NHS capacity is there deal with the cases that come through so that everyone can rely on the NHS when they need it."
"440","Speaker 3: (53:17);If I could just come back, I think a lot of people would say that Germany is a comparably sized country to Britain and obviously is fairing fairly well, by comparison."
"441","Matt Hancock: (53:29);Yes. So I would absolutely concur with that. Of course. And then there are some countries where on that measure, they’re below us, and there are other countries where they’re above us. And the critical thing when you’re trying to work out, as we do every day, how do we make sure that we do our very best for this country? You absolutely take that into account. You learn from where things are going well. In fact, we learn also from places where things aren’t going so well and we’re constantly looking around the world at those comparisons. And it’s exactly right, but the important thing you’ve got to do is scientifically look at the consequences of what people are doing elsewhere so that we can learn about it as a country. Okay."
"442","Matt Hancock: (54:20);Thank you very much indeed. That concludes today’s Downing street press conference, and I’m very grateful to Professor Van-Tam and to Professor John Newton for your support. Thanks very much indeed."
"443","Dominic Raab: (00:00);… and that whole MOD led by defense secretary Ben Wallace, they have been there every step of the way, helping us to build the new NHS Nightingale Hospitals, to reinforce our critical care capacity, supporting our local resilience forums in delivering personal protective equipment where it’s needed most, and helping also to deliver the mobile labs, which are critical to ramping up our testing capacity right across the country. And as a result of those efforts and that teamwork, hospitals have been able to treat more patients. As a result, they’ve saved more lives, and we’ve ensured that the peak of this virus has not overwhelmed the NHS."
"444","Dominic Raab: (00:42);And today our armed forces are, again, part of that team is we announce two new deployments to the NHS Nightingale facilities in Harrogate and Bristol. And across the UK, this extra hospital capacity, which itself comes on top of the 33,000 additional beds we’ve managed to free up across the NHS. That’s the equivalent of building an extra 50 district general hospitals, and as I said, that has safeguarded the capacity in our hospitals both to care for coronavirus patients, but also to make sure other people get the urgent care or the emergency treatment they need. People used to joke in this country that you could never build a hospital that quickly. Well, we didn’t just build one. We built seven, and we thank our armed forces for helping to make that happen. And you know, for many countries around the world, including modern democracies, the site of their military on the streets in a national emergency could be a cause for concern or even trepidation. But for the British people, the site of our armed forces working side by side with our brilliant NHS staff offers a calm reassurance that the task is at hand and that we will come through this crisis."
"445","Dominic Raab: (01:58);Now, I make no bones about it. There have been challenges. There still are challenges. We’re not there yet. We continue to ramp up the testing capacity, which will play a really important role in the next phase of the crisis. Amidst a global shortage in personal protective equipment, we’ve distributed over a billion items to the front line, where it’s needed most. We’ve just brought in Lord Deighton, who helped organize the London Olympics, to boost our domestic supply even further, and I’m on the phone every day pursuing the next batch of deliveries from abroad with the support of our tireless diplomatic service, and the first of several new deliveries landed from Turkey in the early hours this morning."
"446","Dominic Raab: (02:40);We will only come through this global pandemic if we come together as a nation, and if we bring other countries around the world together so that we can rise to this international challenge. And as we work with our partners abroad to get the PPE we need. To get the ventilators we need to pursue a vaccine for this terrible virus, we’re also working night and day to return stranded British nationals from all four corners of the world. We kept airports open and airlines running to bring over a million Brits home on commercial flights, a massive endeavor. And on top of that, at the FCA, we set up a 75 million pound special charter arrangement with the airlines, and that’s already brought home over 13,000 people on 63 flights from more than a dozen countries, and we’re organizing more charter flights in the days ahead from India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, New Zealand, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone. So at home and abroad we’re meeting the whole range of challenges that coronavirus presents, and if we stick together and if we stay the course, we will defeat this virus for good."
"447","Dominic Raab: (03:47);And I think I’ll now turn over to Sir Nick to brief us on the latest military involvement in the effort."
"448","Nick Carter: (03:53);First Secretary, thank you very much. The First Secretary has asked me today to give you an update on what the armed forces and defense as a whole is doing in support of the government’s response to the virus. Upfront, I would say that our role has been entirely in support of the heroic healthcare workers on the front line, that’s both the NHS and social care, with humility very much being our watchword in the way that we give that support. We’ve done it in a variety of ways. We’ve supported first and foremost the Ministry of Housing, Community, and Local Government, and the devolved administrations through the national spine of local regional fora that the first secretary referred to, and we have dozens of liaison officers embedded into each of those fora."
"449","Nick Carter: (04:35);It’s a tried and tested system that’s been used many times in the past, whether for delivering military aid to the civil authorities through for the foot and mouth, or for flooding, or for wildfires. It’s frequently exercised, and there are very close relationships which give great confidence between all of those who are working on those teams at the lower level. And I think it’s important, this, because of course it’s that delegated sense at that level which works, because it makes them much more responsive and much more flexible to local demand, whether it’s for ambulance drivers, or for testing, or for whatever else.With decentralization being so much of the key to the way some of this is done, and the Defense Secretary delegated authorities to this level early in the crisis, which has proved to be extraordinary successful. We’ve also been giving support to the Department for Health and Social Care, and of course the NHS."
"450","Nick Carter: (05:25);First and foremost, this has been a logistic task, and I would say that I think in all of my more than 40 years of service, this is the single greatest logistic challenge that I’ve come across. I’ll just give you a scale of the problem. In 25 days since we started working together with the NHS, they’ve gone from some 240 customers they deliver to normally to nearly 50,000 customers. This has involved creating 260,000 square feet of distribution warehousing. That’s nearly four football fields worth, and some 38 additional delivery routes per day. That’s the equivalent to driving three times around the world. That is a major logistic challenge."
"451","Nick Carter: (06:07);We’ve of course been involved in the Nightingales, which the First Secretary referred to, but we’ve also been involved in planning, and what we call command and control, providing additional resilience to hard pressed staff, and we’ve got dozens of people embedded both in Skipton House, but also in Victoria House, where the DHSC headquarters is. We’re involved in testing both in terms of playing a role in helping design the system but also in manning some of the regional test centers and adopting some innovative approaches, like mobile pop-up centers, which will make it possible to get to the decentralized areas that I described earlier."
"452","Nick Carter: (06:44);And a brigade commander we have there, Brigadier Lizzie Faithfull-Davies and her team, have been very imaginative in the way that they’ve taken this forward. And of course we’ve provided an Aviation Task Force that’s been able to support the communities from Scotland down to the Channel Islands, in Northern Ireland, and from Wales to the east coast of England. We’ve been involved in helping the Foreign Office with repatriations and supporting our overseas territories, where we have security advisory teams deployed now in several of them, and of course we’ve deployed ships, HMS Argus, to do just that. And we’ve been involved with the Cabinet Office Rapid Response Unit, with our 77 Brigade helping to quash rumors from misinformation, but also to counter disinformation."
"453","Nick Carter: (07:27);Between 3,000 and 4,000 of our people have been involved with around 20,000 available the whole time at high readiness. We probably have at the moment some 73 ongoing tasks, and we’ve probably completed about 30. What’s interesting is it’s been very much a whole force, not just of regular military from all the three services, but reservists as well. Some 15% of the force has been reservists. It’s involved defense civilians, defense contractors, scientists from [inaudible 00:07:57], and something called the Engineer and Logistic Staff Corps, where we bring in people from industry who work inside the military in times of crisis and provide expert support for how we might link into the civilian community to bring forward skills, and indeed industrial support."
"454","Nick Carter: (08:14);The skills have been about planning, logisticians, medics, engineers, and CIS or IT-based people, and the road has been very much about catalyzing, designing, and supporting, and I’ll just single out one individual to give you an example of the sorts of backgrounds that we’re talking about. A young Major called Major Eb Mukhtar has been mobilized from the Reserve. He’s really stepped up to the plate. His daytime job is as a logistics expert who runs Google’s transport network across Europe, North Africa, and the Middle East. He has been part of the supply team that’s been working on how we distribute PPE. He’s designed an e-portal in partnership with eBay, which will in due course manage individual customers, and he designed a bulk supply chain for distribution of PPE to all of the NHS regions and trusts."
"455","Nick Carter: (09:05);Now, despite all of this, we are still involved of course in protecting the country, and there are essential operations that must continue, whether that’s defending the homeland with the nuclear deterrent, or protecting British and UK airspace more generally. Whether it’s overseas operations in Afghanistan, the Middle East, Africa and further afield, or whether it’s about fielding essential operational capability. And what we do as we do this is to take great care not to endanger the population."
"456","Nick Carter: (09:34);All of this is a truly national endeavor. We’ve even mobilized 99 year old veterans, and I think everyone would agree that Captain Tom Moore embodies the sense of service and duty ingrained in our armed forces. Our armed forces are drawn from every part of the United Kingdom and much of the Commonwealth, and they take great pride in serving the communities that they are part of. Everyone is experiencing real challenges at the moment, and it makes me feel immensely proud of our collective national effort in pulling together behind those on the frontline to combat this unprecedented challenge, which I firmly believe we will defeat together. Thank you."
"457","Dominic Raab: (10:20);Brilliant. Thank you very much, Sir Nick. Chris, would you talk us through some of the latest data please?"
"458","Chris Whitty: (10:24);Thank you very much, First Secretary, and before I do, can I just on behalf of my colleagues in the NHS thank the armed forces enormously for the assistance they’ve given us, which has been absolutely terrific? These slides are, I think, familiar to most people who watch this. The first is a look at transport usage in the country, and it’s really as a proxy for, “Are people continuing to stay at home except for essential business?” And as you can see, although there is some bumping along, it has broadly remained very stable, despite the fact that people have had to do this for a considerable now period of time, and there is further time we’re going to have to do this if we wish to pull the peak of this right down. Next slide please."
"459","Chris Whitty: (11:13);Looking at new cases in the UK, these are tests positive, whether they’re in hospital or out of hospital. As you can see, this is broadly flat with a slight trend downwards over the last several days, really back to about the 8th of April, but not a steep descent at this point. Next slide please."
"460","Chris Whitty: (11:35);And if you look at people in hospital with COVID-19, looking across the country, the situation is either improving, and I think it’s particularly improving, for example, in London, or broadly flat across all four nations. Next slide please."
"461","Chris Whitty: (11:53);If you look at people who have sadly died in hospital, this is not all deaths, but this is probably the majority of those who have sadly died with COVID. What you can see again is that the very steep upward climb that there was up to the earlier part of this month has now flattened off over the last week and a half. Next slide please."
"462","Chris Whitty: (12:19);And this is a slide we use just really to track the trajectory between different countries. I should be clear that trying to compare different countries using these kind of data is notoriously difficult, but it does show the trajectories between the different countries with the UK using hospital data, which is our most steady source of data over that time. Next slide please."
"463","Chris Whitty: (12:45);This is just one slide we thought we would add in in addition, because I think it makes a point which I think is important for people fully to understand, and what you can see here, this is the seven day rolling average for deaths, sadly, in several countries, including the UK. And the reason I thought it was sensible to put this in was for people to see that even in those countries which started their epidemic curve earlier than the UK and which are still ahead, the downward slope from the point where we change is a relatively slow one, and we should anticipate the same situation in the UK. We should not expect this to be a sudden fall away of cases. Thank you very much."
"464","Dominic Raab: (13:32);Thank you very much, Chris. Let’s turn to the media. Have we got Alison Holt there from the BBC?"
"465","Alison Holt: (13:38);Yes. First Secretary, worrying figures today suggested doubling in care home deaths in England. In a virus that targets the elderly and the vulnerable, do you see that as inevitable?"
"466","Dominic Raab: (13:53);I didn’t catch the last bit of it. I’ll let Chris Whitty talk about, I think, the CQC."
"467","Alison Holt: (13:59);Let me just repeat it."
"468","Dominic Raab: (14:00);Why don’t you? Please. Thanks."
"469","Alison Holt: (14:03);Okay. So we’ve seen a-"
"470","Alison Holt: (14:03);… doubling in care home deaths in England. In a virus that targets the elderly and the vulnerable, do you see that as inevitable?"
"471","Dominic Raab: (14:17);No, I don’t think anything is inevitable. We’re fighting tooth and nail striving every senior to make sure we minimize the life lost in all contexts. I’ll let Chris Whitty say a little bit more about the CQC data, which I think is going to be published, but obviously in care homes, whether it’s on PPE, testing, PPE deliveries, whether it’s on testing across the whole range of things that we’re looking at, we are doing everything we can to make sure we provide the support to them to protect the care homes, to protect the workers there, and obviously to protect the residents as well. Of course, it is a vulnerable part of our community if you like, and we are targeting all of our efforts to make sure that we protect and safeguard as best we can the most vulnerable in our society. Chris, do you want say anything on the CQC?"
"472","Chris Whitty: (15:06);Well [inaudible 00:15:07] hasn’t yet published its report. But I think in terms of care home deaths, sadly your starting position is of course correct. In care homes, what we have is a large number of people of the most vulnerable age for this virus. This is a virus which is particularly a virus of people who are older, and particularly a virus which causes severe disease and death in a minority, but an increasing minority as you go up in age, and in those who have coexisting medical problems. And many people in care homes of course, and nursing homes in particular have coexisting medical problems. So they are a very vulnerable group. You’re absolutely right. The numbers that have been ascribed to COVID directly in ONS statistics are still relatively modest. But I’ve said repeatedly in data, the fact that the ONS said in their last weekly report, 826 deaths, every one of them a tragedy."
"473","Chris Whitty: (16:09);But I think that will be an underestimate, and what we need to look at in these data and other data if we want to get a true picture is, and I’ve said this right from the beginning, the all cause seasonally adjusted mortality over time. And that is because as I’ve said again before, deaths from COVID will be a combination of direct deaths from the virus, and also indirect deaths if for example people are nervous about going into hospital. And I think one of the things we’ve been trying to make really clear is it is absolutely critical that if people have heart attacks, strokes, children have asthma, severe asthma attacks, any of the things that have severity and this would include people in social care settings that the NHS remains absolutely able to manage emergencies as it always been able to manage emergencies."
"474","Chris Whitty: (17:01);But when we look back over this epidemic, and I want to be really clear, we are not anywhere near being able to say, “Right, that’s done. We can now look back.” When we are at that stage, I’m sure we will see a high mortality rate to sadly in care homes because this is a very, very vulnerable group, and people are coming in and out of care homes, and that cannot to some extent be prevented."
"475","Dominic Raab: (17:25);Alison, did you want to follow up on any of that?"
"476","Alison Holt: (17:28);Just a quick follow up. I mean families and staff in care homes have heard lots of promises about protective equipment, about testing, but what I’m being told is they’re just still not seeing that on the ground. So what reassurance would you give them that they are being made a priority in this?"
"477","Dominic Raab: (17:46);Look, we are conscious that there’s a challenge with care homes. I’d said that in my early remarks, but we are doing everything we can. The situation is improving. We are getting the PPE to those places that need it. We are working with the military in relation to some of the mobile testing labs because we know that it’s difficult for some people in care homes to access the testing. We’ve revised the guidance or the NHS revised the guidance to make sure on discharge the … We’re actually being very careful with those that go into care homes. We are doing everything we can. We understand their concerns or anxiety. I feel for those who are living in care homes and are nervous about this, all their loved ones, and we’re doing absolutely everything we can to protect them. Robert Peston from ITV."
"478","Robert Peston: (18:35);Good afternoon. Representatives of the TSSA transport union have been told to prepare for a possible increase in a phased way of the railway service between the 11th and 18th of May. Now we’re obviously not looking at an exit from lockdown, but is that a timetable for modifications of the lockdown, and secondly, overseas doctors and nurses working in the NHS pay a surcharge of hundreds of pounds a year, thousands if they’ve got families to use the NHS. Given that they are putting their lives on the line to protect us, is there a case for waving that surcharge?"
"479","Dominic Raab: (19:24);Well, first of all, the dates that you described, I don’t know where they come from. It’s not something I recognize, and as Chris Whitty has rightly said and as the Governor of the Bank of England has said, so you’ve got it from the public health, but also the economic perspective, it would be a mistake to take our eye off the ball right now. The focus is still delivering us through the peak, and we’re obviously reliant as I said last Thursday on the data that we get back from Sage and a couple of weeks time in order to even think about the next phase. And in relation to people here from overseas working in our NHS, the Home Secretary has already outlined some measures to make sure that their interests are safeguarded. We pay tribute to the incredible job they do, and of course we want to look after them in every way possible. Robert did you want to come back on any of that?"
"480","Robert Peston: (20:12);Well, I just want to … You didn’t really say whether the surcharge would be waived. And just on these union representatives, is it just that their managers have just got it wrong?"
"481","Dominic Raab: (20:22);Well, I don’t know on the unions what information they’ve got, but I’m telling you that that is not a government timetable. We’ve had lots of attempts to put that to us, and I understand why people would try and do that. That is absolutely not a timetable that we’re working to that I recognize, or that is under consideration right now. And I’ll defer to the Home Secretary on and the Health Secretary on issues around the surcharge. But I think the point I would want to make really loudly and really clearly is we pay tribute to all those from overseas who are doing a heroic job in our NHS on the front line. Beth Rigby from Sky."
"482","Beth Rigby: (20:59);Thank you. A question first to Professor Whitty please. We’ve talked a lot about PPE shortages and trying to plug the gaps, but NHS workers just want to know they have the equipment they need when they turn up at work. Can you tell me when you expect the shortages to be resolved? Is it three days? Is it a week, or can’t you answer that question? And to the First Secretary please, the Health Secretary said today we’ve reached the peak of the crisis, and he said it was time to reopen the NHS for routine care. Is this the light at the end of the tunnel that we have been talking about and waiting for, and might we all look forward to some modest easing of restrictions on May the seventh when you review the lockdown?"
"483","Dominic Raab: (21:48);So there’s certainly light at the end of the tunnel. There is a glimmer, but we’re not there yet. I think the way I would describe it, but I’ll defer to Chris on where we are, we’re coming through the peak, but we’re not there yet. And I think the health sector is repeating what CMO has already said, which is one of the positives, one of the successes amidst all the challenges which I’m open to and accept has been that we’ve kept NHS capacity with the headroom not just to deal with COVID-19 patients, but to deal with all of those other people who have got ailments, injuries or who need treatment. I’ve heard Chris Whitty said it before, the NHS is still there for them, and I think he wanted to echo that point."
"484","Chris Whitty: (22:30);In terms of PPE, so I’m not a international procurement expert, so in a sense, I’m going to say what I’m told rather than pretend any expertise in this area. But it is very clear that at the moment, we are tight at different times for different items of PPE. It’s not everything at all times, but different things at different points have been very, very close to the line. And of course when you are close to the line, inefficiencies in any kind of part of the system tend to lead to local stockouts. So if you’re very, very heavily overstocked, that’s less true. And this is why the support from the armed forces and so on has been so critical to trying to reduce this. So at this point in time, we are still close to the line, but at a national level, we’re not underwater on anything that I’m aware of."
"485","Chris Whitty: (23:20);And I keep quite a close eye on this because I care very deeply about this as do all members of my profession. But of course, there may be local issues, and I’m aware of them from my colleagues along the way. And all of us want to be in a position where there is a sufficient excess over a long period of time that this can all be balanced out. But because of a combination of excellent work from the armed forces and mutual aid where different hospitals and care homes and others are sharing what they have, we have broadly, and this is a tribute to the services involved, managed a very difficult situation without yet getting to the point where that we’re no longer able to cope with it. But I think to promise now that in two or three days this is all going to be sorted in the context of the credibly difficult according to my colleagues, and I see absolutely no reason to disbelieve them having read the international press, credibly difficult situation where everybody, every country wants these, and the suppliers are very limited I think would be a mistake."
"486","Chris Whitty: (24:22);I think what we need to do is we need to manage it as best it is possible to be managed. And I’m very aware that my expert colleagues in this area are working the whole time on this. And I care about it, and I check on this the whole time. And they assure me that they are and I can see that they are. And that is why we’ve managed to keep just ahead at a national level with some significant local pressures from time to time."
"487","Dominic Raab: (24:46);Beth did you want to come back?"
"488","Beth Rigby: (24:47);Yeah. Yeah just quickly in terms of the lockdown, I understand that you don’t want to spell out exactly what you intend, but the Irish Prime Minister has told the Irish people he will at least give them a roadmap by May the fifth to give them a sense of how they might begin to work through this. Germany is allowing some smaller shops to reopen. I understand that you might want to flex the model, but the British people aren’t silly. I mean they understand what’s facing them. Can’t you at least give them some idea of what might be coming down the road?"
"489","Dominic Raab: (25:24);Well that’s why on Thursday I set out these five principles, but key to that is recognizing that we don’t want to risk a second spike in the virus. And the challenge that we’ve got is that as the transmission rate comes down, we need to get more data as to precisely where it is in order to inform the measures that we could actively consider. So I think the responsible thing to do if I may say at least on the data that we’ve got is to make sure we’ve got that evidence before we start touting around ideas at the risk of there not being either us not being able to deliver them, or taking them and then risking a second spike. And I do think again, it’s something Chris has highlighted, but also Andrew Bailey, the Governor of the Bank of England, we must avoid a second spike. And so whilst I know people will be wanting us to give them more information, and the minute we can responsibly do so based on the evidence we will."
"490","Dominic Raab: (26:15);At the moment right now and I think the vast majority of people in this country recognize it, we’ve got to keep our eye on the ball because we’re coming through the peak, but we’re not done yet. Laura Makin-Isherwood from British Forces News."
"491","Laura Makin-Isherwood: (26:29);Good evening. First Secretary of State, you’ve praised the work of the military today, but there are 20,000 personnel on standby to help in this crisis, and fewer than 3000 have actually been deployed. So are you under utilizing a [inaudible 00:26:41] of very skilled people that could essentially take the strain off the NHS further perhaps be deployed to all NHS Nightingale Hospitals? To the Chief of the Defense Staff, the government still says it hopes to reach 100,000 COVID-19 tests a day by the end of the month. Will you be helping to ensure that that target is met? Will you be taking over drive through test sites, for example? And to Professor Whitty if I may, scientists at Porton Down Laboratories are trying to work out what percentage or proportion of the population might’ve been infected with COVID-19. How are those figures looking?"
"492","Dominic Raab: (27:16);Well, just on the question you asked me, of course we want to make sure we use all of our resources in the right way that complements and supplements the brilliant work of the NHS, and we’re always talking and considering what more can be done. I talked about the deployment to the new Nightingale Hospitals, and I’ve been talking with the Defense Secretary about the mobile testing labs and how we can deploy them in the future. But of course, those are difficult decisions. We’ve got to make sure that we deploy our resources where they add the greatest value and in the right way. So, Nick, I don’t know whether you want to go back on the second question."
"493","Nick Carter: (27:47);I might have a go at the first part of your question as well. I mean, the answer is that we have deployed all that we have needed to deploy at this stage in support of the organizations that we’re working for. There is more there if people need it, but the sorts of skills and capabilities that are in the remaining 20,000 are not necessarily the ones that people need at this-"
"494","Nick Carter: (28:03);… point in time. And to your question about testing, yes, we’re working very closely with the DHSC and with the NHS and more broadly through the local [inaudible 00:00:28:13], that I described in my opening remarks. Because what we’re trying to do, is to help design the right system with the team in DHSC that can provide the sort of testing that customers need, so that you match demand to supply in the right way. And that’s why the innovative idea of popups unlike mobile libraries, we think will be a very useful way of going. And what we’re trying to do at the moment, is to upscale that idea so that we’ve got enough capacity to be able to get out into those areas which are harder to reach. So, it’s an overall system that’s been put together at the moment. It will be very sophisticated once it’s completed. And there’s some very really good people designing it and we’re working with those people to make it as good as it possibly can be."
"495","Dominic Raab: (28:55);Chris, on the last point."
"496","Chris Whitty: (28:56);On the last one. So, you’re absolutely right, that [inaudible 00:28:58] has some of the best capacity to do what’s called, serological testing. This is the testing, the antibody testing, where you can tell whether someone in the past has had an infection including COVID-19. The problem we have had, is that we do not yet have a test that is as good as we would want even with the expertise of the academic sector, [inaudible 00:29:21] and their expertise, Public Health England and their expertise, and industry. And many different people are trying to work on an improved test, there are fairly good tests at the moment on this, but there are not very good tests."
"497","Chris Whitty: (29:33);This is one of the critical bits of information we need to make decisions. And I’m hoping… But I’ve been hoping for a while, so I don’t want to over promise on this, that we will shortly have tests that are good enough to get at least a ranging shot as to what proportion of people in different age groups, in different parts of the country, have had this virus. But we’re not yet at the point, I think, where we have a test we can say that reliably, but I’m hoping we will be able to do so in the pretty near future."
"498","Dominic Raab: (30:04);Or, would you like a follow up there?"
"499","Laura: (30:05);Yeah, if that’s all right."
"500","Dominic Raab: (30:07);Sure."
"501","Laura: (30:07);We obviously have heard from so many places now that there’s a real shortage of PPE, are the military themselves going to be protected enough when they’re helping in these incidents and when they’re deployed? And also, is there any update on what’s happened with the arrival of that PPE from Turkey? Is that on the front line with those medical staff that need it now or is it still being checked?"
"502","Dominic Raab: (30:29);Well, we obviously very carefully check all the consignments that we get. We’ve had reports in other countries of PPE that’s then distributed to the frontline, it isn’t effective. Not only does it have to be withdrawn, but then you have to isolate or send into self isolation the care workers. So, we do check that very carefully. The consignment has landed and we are expecting further consignments in the future. But as Chris mentioned earlier, it’s an incredibly competitive market and it just shows you that Turkish challenge that we had. How you need to have excellent cooperation with the Turkish government, and I had conversations over the weekend with my Turkish opposite number, and also how the MOD and the SCO have worked hand in glove together and it’s a team effort, to get all of the supplies we possibly can, and we’ll continue to do it. We obviously don’t want, and will take every step we can to avoid for all of those reasons, any risk to anyone on the frontline in terms of the quality of the PPE. I don’t know, Nick, whether you want to say anything more about that in relation to the military."
"503","Nick Carter: (31:28);Yes. Laura, those military personnel who were deployed alongside healthcare workers and the like, are equipped in the same way that they are for the function that they’re performing."
"504","Dominic Raab: (31:39);Tom Newton, down from The Sun."
"505","Tom Newton: (31:43);Foreign secretary, thank you very much. Question to you and the chief medical officer, if I may. We understand that Sage, having looked again at the issue of wearing masks, and they decided to advise you that it would be a good idea to wear some sort of [inaudible 00:03:58], fluff or otherwise, for people who are asymptomatic but able to transmit the disease themselves. When are you going to meet to decide on that? And it doesn’t [inaudible 00:32:10] today, what’s your advice to people tomorrow morning going to work? Should they or should they not be wearing face masks to protect people? And to the chief medical officer, can you say a little bit about the work you’re doing at the moment for the end of the month on restrictions? What sort of shape is that taking? And in particular on the first secretary’s fifth and most important test, as he says, on avoiding a second peak and being sure you can do that. [inaudible 00:32:37] can you ever get yourself in a position that you are sure? Almost seems an [inaudible 00:00:32:40]. or, are you calm that you can design some sort of new metric for that?"
"506","Dominic Raab: (32:46);I’ll let Chris answer that one. On [inaudible 00:32:48] Sage, as always the case, we’ll look at the evolving evidence as we learn lessons through this crisis. They have been asked to look at the mask issue again, we haven’t had the advice back yet, so nothing will change until we’ve had that and considered it"
"507","Chris Whitty: (33:02);In terms of what we’re looking to the future, and of course you’re absolutely right, this is a critical question, not just for the UK but for other countries and we share our experiences. The… There is an upper and a lower bound, of what is possible. The upper bound of this is, we cannot allow the R, the force of transmission, to go above 1, for any extended period at any point. Because if it does, exponential growth of this will continue. It will resume and we will get back to a situation where the NHS could have its emergency services overwhelmed, which we’ve managed to avoid due to the remarkable work of the NHS itself in expanding its activities, the British public in heeding advice to stay home, and some significant help, of course, from the armed forces."
"508","Chris Whitty: (33:50);So… But, if it goes back up and you get exponential growth where you’ve got a doubling time of a few days, or to say, it does not take very long before you move from bad numbers to really bad numbers over quite a short period of time, and at one… At some point… To the point where the NHS would really find it very difficult. So we cannot allow that to happen. At the bottom end of the… In a sense, the other end of the bracket of what’s possible, is this disease is not going to be eradicated, it is not going to disappear. So we have to accept that we are working with a disease that we are going to be with globally, this is a global problem, for the foreseeable future."
"509","Chris Whitty: (34:31);And what we’re trying to work out is, what are the things which actually add up to an R of less than 1? And there are lots of different options which ministers will then have to consider. But that narrows our options quite significantly. If you’re having to keep the R below 1… And I think we have to be very realistic that, if people are hoping that it’s suddenly going to move from where we are now in lockdown suddenly into everything is gone, that is a wholly unrealistic expectation. We are going to have to do a lot of things for really quite a long period of time. The question is, what is the best package? And this is what we’re trying to work out. But if you release more of one area, you have to keep on board more of another area. So, there is actually a proper trade off, and this is what ministers will… Are having to consider."
"510","Dominic Raab: (35:19);Tom, would you like to follow up on any of that?"
"511","Tom Newton: (35:20);Just a quick one. I think some people are going to be some doubt whether to wear face masks tomorrow morning after your question, but I don’t think I can get much more… Can I just quickly follow up with, Professor Whitty? Very interesting on what you’re saying about the R, is establishing R below 1 enough for you on easing these particular restrictions, whatever effect that has? Or, would you be wanting to go down to 0.5, 0.25, or whatever? Is it just a case of simply a tiny percentage below? Or, can you calculate [inaudible 00:35:56] that you’ll be extremely comfortable with?"
"512","Chris Whitty: (36:00);Well, R going below… Not going above one, is a minimum ask, that absolutely has to happen. There are then a number of, from a purely health point of view… And this goes back to something I’ve said before, but I will repeat myself because obviously it may be a different audience. There are multiple different ways in which this epidemic is going to kill people or cause ill health. The direct causes of deaths from the COVID… The potential of the indirect causes of death if the NHS gets overwhelmed, which we have absolutely been determined should not happen, it has not happened, we are determined it does not happen. But the third area is, people who die indirectly because the health service has had to be reoriented towards COVID, and therefore you can’t do other things, elective things, screening, a number of other things that the NHS normally would do."
"513","Chris Whitty: (36:48);But there is also a final group which is, if the interventions we have extend deprivation among people, that is also a risk to their long-term health. And all of these, are going to have to be taken into account from a health point of view. And they don’t all lead to exactly… If you’re optimizing it for one, you may not be optimizing it for another. So what we have to do, is think very seriously about this, what is the best balance of measures that gives us the best public health outcome? Which is… Does absolutely include, people who die, sadly, directly of COVID, but also has to include all these other factors."
"514","Dominic Raab: (37:25);Thanks, Tom. Can we go next to Gordon Rayner, from The Telegraph?"
"515","Gordon Rayner: (37:30);Thank you, first secretary. Can I ask a question for yourself and the CMO, first? Can you guarantee the public that if the Oxford or Imperial vaccine trials proved successful, British people who paid for those trials will be the first to get the vaccines? How else has the CMO… Just following on Tom’s question, is it possible for us to ease the lockdown measures before we have a contact tracing system in place, which the health secretary has been talking about quite a lot today? And… So just lastly, one question for the first secretary, specifically. In October, 2016, the government run a pandemic drill called, Exercise Cygnus, as you all know. It involved all nature government departments, and simulated an epidemic similar to the one we’re facing today. Tens of thousands of people died in the simulation, but its findings have never been published. Can you today commit to making those documents publicly available?"
"516","Dominic Raab: (38:35);No, I can’t. I think if they were conducted in the circumstances that you described, I’d have to look very carefully at the rules around it. But, I’m happy to take that away and have a look at it. Chris, on the other points."
"517","Chris Whitty: (38:48);Vaccines… Well, I mean that… In a sense, that’s a commercial question as much as it is a scientific question. We… Obviously, the UK is going to want to get early or very… Or… As fast as we possibly can, access to any effective vaccine, in a sense, whether it’s developed in the UK or developed somewhere else. But a lot of work has been put into at the moment, both trying to support the science so that an initial vaccine can be done and we support this directly in the UK and indirectly elsewhere through other routes. But even once you’ve got a vaccine, this is the point Sir Patrick Vallance has made several times to the government [inaudible 00:39:24] advisor, you then have to go into big trials."
"518","Chris Whitty: (39:26);And then also, and this is a bit people often forget, into manufacturing and scaling up and all the way along that path. We’re going to want to keep track of this and make sure that the UK has access. But I mean, this is not a straightforward position. In terms of the lockdown question, essentially there are quite a large number of possible combinations of things you can do. You’re certainly right that contact tracing is one of those. But I think… What I think we need to do, is put to ministers all the various things that are possible. And at that point, they will decide what the right combination is that achieves the best public health and wider social goals."
"519","Dominic Raab: (40:09);I mean, Gordon just on that. Let’s be clear about this, the vaccine is not going to come in anytime, particularly soon, to allow us to ease out of the current social distancing measures into a transition. I think it would, and I’ll be corrected if I’m inaccurate about this, it’d be more likely to be of particular value in stopping a second global wave down the track if we don’t eliminate coronavirus for good."
"520","Chris Whitty: (40:34);So, should I just add to that? So I think, in the long run, the exit from this is going to be one of two things, ideally. One of which is, a highly effective vaccine, and there are a variety of ways vaccines can be deployed. They can be deployed for… Damping down epidemics that can be deployed to protect vulnerable people. And, or, highly effective drugs so that people stop dying of this disease even if they catch it, or which can prevent this disease in vulnerable people. Until we have those, and the probability of having those anytime in the next calendar year, are incredibly small, and I think we should be realistic about that, we’re going to have to rely on other social measures. Which of course are very socially disruptive as everyone is finding out the moment. But until that point, that is what we will have to do. And it will have to be the best combination that maximizes the outlooks, but it’s going to take a long time and I think we need to be aware of that."
"521","Dominic Raab: (41:32);Gordon, do you want to come back on any of that?"
"522","Gordon Rayner: (41:36);Well, just briefly. On… To Professor Whitty, if you’re saying that you don’t expect a vaccine to be available in the next calendar year, are you effectively saying that we’re going to have very socially disruptive measures for probably the next calendar year? And… Sorry, just to come back first secretary on Exercise Cygnus very quickly. Could I just ask, have you personally read the document and has it been made available-"
"523","Gordon Rayner: (42:02);… available to all of your key scientific advisors?"
"524","Dominic Raab: (42:02);I would have to go and check, I’m afraid. A huge volume over recent weeks, but it’s not something that immediately springs to mind. Chris, on the-"
"525","Chris Whitty: (42:13);On the vaccines, I am very hopeful that we will have vaccines which have proof of concept much earlier than a year, to be clear. There are very large numbers of people around the world, very good groups, excellent ones in the UK, first vaccine tomorrow in demand here. But there is a long path between having a vaccine that’s proof of concept. And until we have either a vaccine or a drug… I mean, we have managed other epidemics without a vaccine. HIV is an example where it’s managed with a drug or combinations of drugs. But until we have those solutions, yes, what we have available to us are social measures, and that’s obviously what we’re using and it’s what’s the optimal combination of those."
"526","Dominic Raab: (42:59);And Gordon, the one thing I’d just add, and it’s really important to reinforce this message. The lower we get the R-level, the transmission rate, the more options we have, which is why our message right now has been just to focus on keeping up the adherence to the social distancing measures. It is making a big difference. And of course, the more we get the transmission level down, the wider the range of options that we would have in place."
"527","Dominic Raab: (43:20);David Hughes, from PA."
"528","David Hughes: (43:27);All right. As we’re looking for a way out of this, is one of the plans you’re considering a mass population testing program? And if so, how would that be administered? When it comes to contact tracing, are you planning to rely on this new app that’s being developed or are you thinking there’s going to be a huge amount of manpower needed. If so, is it something that General Carter and the military would be involved in?"
"529","Dominic Raab: (43:45);I’ll let talk about the wider mapping. Look, we’re boosting the testing capacity. We are looking at the functionality and the way the app would work. The more options, the two big factors in it, I think it leans into the question that Gordon Rayner was asking. The two factors that will help give us a greater range as we transition to the next phase when the evidence suggests that we can, will be getting the transmission level down and the level of testing and the functionality of the app in order to allow us to look at the various different options and control any potential resurgence of the virus, because we will want to be mitigating, keeping it as low as possible."
"530","Dominic Raab: (44:26);So that’s why we’re putting so much effort into not just the testing, but also the wider tracking and tracing that could be put around that. As the weeks proceed, that could have a significant impact on our ability to ease out of the current social distancing measures."
"531","Dominic Raab: (44:44);Chris, anything?"
"532","Chris Whitty: (44:44);There’s a lot of things that you can do with testing. Obviously, patient management. Obviously, allowing people who are in lockdown and they’ve got a relative in the house and that’s the reason they’re there and they’re key workers, to see if they’re able to go to work."
"533","Chris Whitty: (44:59);Obviously though, and this is an area in which we will be doing a lot more of, testing across the community to find out at the earliest possible stage if we’re starting to see a resurgence of this virus. Because at the moment, we’re relying on a situation when people get as far as hospital. If they do that, they’ll have had five days in which they don’t have any symptoms. They might have had up to a week when things are getting worse, and so you’re behind the curve if you rely on that."
"534","Chris Whitty: (45:25);So we’re going to certainly be doing a lot more population testing and we’ll go into details of that once we’ve got this going very shortly to find that the earliest point, is the R below one, are we still going down… or is there some part of the country where the R is beginning to go up, in which case we then need to act. That is going to be part of a wider range of things we need to do with the tests."
"535","Dominic Raab: (45:49);That’s why we set those tests out, the five principles, out last Thursday, because all of those factors inform the proposals and any future decisions we might make."
"536","Dominic Raab: (45:57);David, would you like to follow up there?"
"537","David Hughes: (46:00);Yeah. On the contact tracing app, do you think the British public would be willing to install this on their smartphones given the necessary invasion of privacy it would entail? What’s about the proportion of the population that don’t have a smartphone or wouldn’t feel confident using it?"
"538","Dominic Raab: (46:18);Well, both good points. I think overwhelmingly, what the public expects of us right now is to innovate as best we can to try and ease our way out to the next phase of this virus in a way that protects public health, but also allows us to go back to the kind of economic social life that is as close to normal as possible. So we’ll innovate in those areas. And if we come up with something which is effective, we’ll have to look at those decisions. But I think people do understand that we’re in an exceptional crisis and we need to take measures that we probably wouldn’t think about doing if we weren’t in this crisis."
"539","Dominic Raab: (46:50);Kate Wilson, from The Bristol Post."
"540","Kate Wilson: (46:52);Good evening. Firstly, to the Chief Medical Officer. As we’ve already heard the Health Secretary said this afternoon, the UK have now reached the peak of the coronavirus outbreak. Does that peak extend to places like the Bristol area, where the numbers of cases and deaths are much lower than in other parts of the country or could they peak later? And therefore, will Bristol’s Nightingale Hospital, which is going to be ready to take its first patients from this weekend, still be needed?"
"541","Kate Wilson: (47:20);And secondly for the First Secretary, we know that two-thirds of SMEs in Bristol have stopped trading since lockdown began. If Bristol’s figures have indeed peaked at a lower level, would you consider an earlier exit from lockdown in order to restart the economy here?"
"542","Dominic Raab: (47:35);Chris, do you want… Thank you very much, Kate. Do you want to go first, Chris?"
"543","Chris Whitty: (47:39);I’ll go obviously, on the issue about the numbers. You’re of course right that the Southwest has had probably the least impact from Covid so far. I mean, Bristol itself has had under 500 cases, from memory. It’s also true in the social care settings. There’s a smaller proportion of care homes, have been affected by Covid outbreaks in the Southwest than they have in other parts of the country. So of course, that is absolutely right."
"544","Chris Whitty: (48:14);The thing about the peak we are going through at the moment however, is that it’s not in a sense the natural peak of an epidemic without us doing anything. It’s a peak brought about by the British people staying at home and actually not giving the virus the opportunity to spread. And therefore, the actual peak of it is likely to occur in most parts of the country at really a very similar time. There is a little bit of evidence that there is a slightly earlier effect in London."
"545","Chris Whitty: (48:44);But really elsewhere, there is a little bit of regional variation. But there’s much less, because basically this is an artificial peak brought about by our activity than there might have been had this been running unmitigated, which clearly was absolutely what we are trying to avoid."
"546","Chris Whitty: (49:01);In terms of the Nightingale in Bristol and this would be true of all the Nightingales, it firstly gave us the ability if the British people had not heeded quite to the fantastic extent they had and there had been more pressure on the NHS, it gave us capacity to deal with emergencies. It still will give us and the other Nightingales will give us flexibility. Because if you think about the two forms of concern that I was talking about earlier, the direct deaths, but also the indirect deaths… having the Nightingale capacity enormous help from the armed forces in setting up so fast does actually mean that when we’re planning forward, this does give us a number of options we would not have had if those were not there. Now we shall see how they are properly used."
"547","Chris Whitty: (49:51);I am absolutely delighted that the Nightingales have really not had to be used in great numbers for Covid because that is in a sense, a sign of success. We have been able to cope with this within the emergency environment of the NHS already. But the NHS is going to be under pressure from Covid for really quite a long time, and having that flexibility is an additional thing we can work through in terms of how best to deploy NHS resources for the next several months."
"548","Dominic Raab: (50:24);Kate, look, small businesses are the lifeblood of our economy. They are going through a really tough time right now. SMEs create the lion’s share of jobs in this country, they have done over a sustained period. So we absolutely want to see them through this crisis, and they’ll be part of Britain bouncing back in due course."
"549","Dominic Raab: (50:41);But the risk right now not just for public health, but for all of those small businesses is that if we move too early to ease up in the way that your question suggested, not only would we get a second spike in the virus, we would need to then have a second lockdown. That protract the economic pain and all of the uncertainty that goes with it."
"550","Dominic Raab: (50:59);I can tell you that in terms of the support given to Bristol City Council, they’ve been allocated more than 88 million pounds as part of the government’s business support package. We’ve identified 8,000 business properties which may be eligible for grants. More than 4,000 grant payments would be made. And on top of that we’ve got the loan guarantees, the coronavirus job retention scheme, deferral of VAT payments, tax relief, and other cash grants."
"551","Dominic Raab: (51:27);I take your point that they’re the heart and soul of this country, small businesses. We’ll do everything we can. But I think it will be counterproductive if not dangerous if we eased up too early. Not just for public health, but also for entrepreneurs."
"552","Dominic Raab: (51:40);Would you like to come back on any of that, get the last word?"
"553","Kate Wilson: (51:44);The only thing I wanted, just a little bit more detail if you could on the army as part of the Nightingale Hospital in Bristol. I know you said they had been helped helpful in setting it up. Are they also going to be helping to staff it as well once it’s up and running?"
"554","Dominic Raab: (51:57);Well, the way that the military have tended to work with all the Nightingale hospitals, but I’ll pass on to CDS to supplement, is to support what the NHS workers are doing. And so it will depend on the specifications for each Nightingale hospital, but they’re there to support the NHS staff. Sir Nick, is there anything you’d add to that for Bristol?"
"555","Nick Carter: (52:18);Yes. I mean, in Bristol, we have allocated some combat medics to act as nurses and the like, and some sort of general duties personnel to help support it as well."
"556","Dominic Raab: (52:28);Thanks very much, Kate. That’s all, I think, for this press conference. Thank you all."
"557","Matt Hancock: (00:00);138,078 people have tested positive for the virus. That’s an increase of 4,583 cases since yesterday. 17,615 people have sadly died. 17,615 people, sorry, are currently in hospital, I correct myself, with coronavirus down from 18,189 on the 21st of April. Sadly of those hospitalized, 18,738 have now died. That is an increase of 616 fatalities since yesterday."
"558","Matt Hancock: (00:47);Although this number is lower than it has been in previous days, I still stop and think of each one. They will not be forgotten and their stories will live on. We must maintain our resolve and follow the social distancing rules because they are working, they are protecting the NHS and they’re saving lives. To lift the measures too soon and to risk a second peak would be a mistake. It would undo all of the hard work that’s been done. It would be both bad for our nation’s health and for our nation’s economy. We can only start to change the measures when the NHS can continue to cope, when the operational challenges have been met, when the daily death rate falls sustainably and consistently, when the rate of infection is decreasing, and most importantly, when there’s no risk of a second peak."
"559","Matt Hancock: (01:54);We need to bring the incidence of new infection right down. We’ll then use a rigorous program of test, track and trace and keep it down so we can safely release more of the restrictions. Today I want to set out the progress that we’re making on test, track and trace, which is such an important part of the measures that we’re taking and the work that we’re doing."
"560","Matt Hancock: (02:22);First testing, we set the goal of 100,000 tests per day by the end of this month. I knew when we set it that this was a challenging target. Capacity is now ahead of our plans and even overnight has increased from 40,000 to 51,000. Because capacity has increased so substantially, we’re now able to expand who can get the tests. Our ultimate goal is that everyone who could benefit from a test gets a test. But of course we had to start by prioritizing patients in hospital followed by NHS and social care colleagues and by those in care homes. As we expanded the capacity from just 2,000 tests a day at the start of March to 10,000 tests a day at the start of this month, so we’ve been able to further expand access."
"561","Matt Hancock: (03:18);Today I can go further. We can make it easier, faster and simpler for any essential worker in England who needs a test to get a test. From today, employers of essential workers who will be able to go on gov.uk to get a test for any of their staff who need a test. From tomorrow, any essential workers who need a test, we’ll be able to book an appointment on gov.uk themselves directly. This all applies for people in essential worker’s households too who need a test. It’s all part of getting Britain back on her feet. Those included as essential workers will be based on the list for schools and education set out on gov.uk."
"562","Matt Hancock: (04:11);The whole process will be free. Once you’ve entered your details on the website, you’ll get a text or an email inviting you to book an appointment. After you’ve had your test, results will be sent out by text and a help desk will be available to deal with queries. People who can’t go online can still apply through their employer. I want to make it as easy as possible for people to get a test, not least because we’re talking about people who are ill. Our network of regional test sites has now reached over 30 locations right across the UK and more are being set up each day."
"563","Matt Hancock: (04:47);I just want to take this moment to applaud the private companies who’ve been involved as well as my team, the team in Public Health England and the NHS. Boots, Amazon, Thermofisher, Randox, Roche, Oxford Nanopore, GSK and AstraZeneca, they’ve really stepped up to the mark and I’m grateful to each and every one. We’re also introducing home test kits and with the support of the armed forces, mobile testing sites too. The armed forces and the MOD have played a vital role here. I want to pay tribute to their work. I thought that at yesterday’s briefing General Sir Nick Carter when he said that coronavirus had presented the single greatest logistical challenge in his 40 years of service, I thought that spoke a truth. Our armed forces have played their part in rising to this challenge and I want to thank them all."
"564","Matt Hancock: (05:43);In addition to testing essential workers, we’re also using testing to find out how many people have coronavirus and how many people have had coronavirus. These are critical pieces of information to inform our battle against this novel virus and that we’ll use to learn and we keep learning about every day. This week we’ve begun one of the biggest virus infection and antibody studies that this country has ever seen. This is a joint project with the Office for National Statistics bringing their experience of running large household surveys and the University of Oxford bringing their world-leading scientific expertise. In total, 25,000 people will take part in the first phase with plans to expand it to up to 300,000 people over the next 12 months."
"565","Matt Hancock: (06:32);Participants will provide regular samples taken from self-administered swabs and answer a few short questions during home visits by trained health workers. We will use these tests to help us strengthen our scientific understanding and inform us on the big choices that we have to make about social distancing measures and how we start returning to a more normal life. Letters are arriving on doorsteps from today. Please, if you’re asked, take part in this vital research for your country. The early signs from today are that there is huge enthusiasm for those who’ve received letters taking part in this survey. If you get a letter, please respond to it as soon as you can because you will be doing your bit."
"566","Matt Hancock: (07:20);As we ramp up our ability to test in large numbers and as we slow the spread of the virus, we also need to make sure we’ve got the ability to trace contacts just as effectively. As we look ahead, this is critical to keep the virus under control. We’re putting the infrastructure in place now so that we can roll out contact tracing on a large scale. We’re currently testing the new NHS contact tracing app. If you become unwell with symptoms of coronavirus, you’ll be able to tell the NHS via this app. The app will then send an alert to other app users that you’ve been in significant contact with in recent days, even before you have the symptoms so that they know and they can act accordingly so we can get the test to people even if they’re asymptomatic. If we’re worried that they’ve been in significant contact with someone who has the disease, we’ll be able to let them know."
"567","Matt Hancock: (08:17);But it’s not just about the technology, we need the people to. We need to be really kickstarting contact tracing as the new number of cases begins to fall. We’re preparing for this now by hiring an initial 18,000 people, including over 3,000 clinicians, including public health specialists. We’ll be training up the mass ranks of our contact tracers over the coming weeks and roll out the service."
"568","Matt Hancock: (08:47);This test track and trace will be vital to stop a second peak of the virus, but recent weeks have shown that there is something we can all do. That’s to follow the rules on social distancing. I am acutely aware of how difficult this has been and especially as we enter Ramadan, a month that is so special for so many people. This Ramadan, many Muslims who served their country in the NHS and in the armed forces and in so many other ways, will not be sharing the joy of this month as they normally do. I want to say to all British Muslims, thank you for staying at home. I know how important the daily iftar is, how important communal prayers are at night and how important the Eid festival is."
"569","Matt Hancock: (09:38);Thank you for making major changes to these vital parts of your practice. I want to say to you all, Ramadan Mubarak and thank you for your service and citizenship and thank you for your sacrifice. This will help so that we can together emerge from this challenge all the more united, all the more grateful to one another and all the more safe. We’ve traveled together too far to go backwards now, so please stay at home, protect the NHS and save lives."
"570","Matt Hancock: (10:15);I’m now going to ask Sir Patrick to set out the latest data on the charts."
"571","Sir Patrick Vallance: (10:20);Thank you very much. Can I have the first slide please? A reminder on this slide that this virus spreads between people when we get too close, when we have coughs, when we exchange because of contact. All of us have done a good job actually at staying away from multiple contacts. You can see on this slide, actually 90% or more in some cases people have stayed away from people outside the household. We’ve tried to avoid contact with vulnerable people, however difficult that has been, but it has made a big difference."
"572","Sir Patrick Vallance: (10:58);You can also see that actually the number of people who’ve managed to work from home has actually increased. That has been a really important part of making sure that we reduce the chance of this virus spreading. It’s very clear that actually the transmission in the community is way down from what it was. In terms of the infection spread amongst the population, the social distancing is having a very big effect."
"573","Sir Patrick Vallance: (11:24);Next slide please. This shows new cases, but I’ve said this before and I’ll say it again. This is new cases as determined by testing. There are many more cases, but we know that those cases are coming down. Here it looks fairly flat because it’s the testing slide. What you can see here though is that the number of people who have been tested for medical reasons in blue is coming down slightly even on this, even though there are many more tests being done and of course, it’s now possible to test the number of essential workers in the orange bar."
"574","Sir Patrick Vallance: (11:57);But the real acid test is what’s this turning into in terms of the effects? Next slide please. This is the number of people in hospital with COVID. Here you can see a very clear decline in London. You can see that in other areas there are declines such as in the Midlands. You can see in nearly all areas this is flat or on the way down. This speaks to the point, that as we’ve radically reduced the number of infections in the community, this has turned into a reduction in the number in hospital. We’re still at that period coming through the peak, but you can see it’s headed very much in the right direction."
"575","Sir Patrick Vallance: (12:39);This in turn with a delay translates into what happens in intensive care units. Next slide, please. In intensive care units, you can see here the percentage of beds being occupied you can see that the number went up, of course, reached a plateau and is gradually decreasing. As I’ve said before, you’d expect this to be a gradual …"
"576","Sir Patrick Vallance: (13:03);… decline and to take longer than the decrease in admissions. I do want to say one other thing about what’s happening in hospitals though. There is a very large clinical trial going on trying to work out which medicines may make a difference in this disease, and one of those studies has recruited 7,000 patients and there’ll be results coming out from that in due course. I would just urge as we enter the phase where the plateau has been reached, slight decrease we can see, we continue to make sure that we enroll patients in clinical trials so that we get the answers to the critical questions about which medicines may work. Final slide please."
"577","Sir Patrick Vallance: (13:50);Not surprisingly, we know this is a problem in terms of the severity of the disease that although the number of patients in intensive care units is coming down slowly, the deaths remain at a plateau coming down slightly, not coming down fast. I would expect that to continue for another couple of weeks and we will then see a faster decline thereafter. It’s crucially important, going back to the beginning, that we all keep firm with our attention to social distancing because it’s at that end that we stop the progression through hospital intensive care unit, and ultimately unfortunately for some people to death, and I think it’s crucial that we all do our part to keep this going and you can see it’s headed in the right direction and we must stay firm with the measures we’re taking."
"578","Matt Hancock: (14:42);Thanks very much. John, if you’d update us on where we are on on the testing program in a bit more detail."
"579","John Newton: (14:48);Thank you secretary of state. I want to use this opportunity to talk about the why and the what of our national testing program. Why do we need it, and what are we doing to make sure everyone who would benefit from a test can get one? I should first explain when we talk about testing, we are talking about two different types of tests. The first type is a swab test for the presence of the virus. The second type is a blood test to show who has previously had the virus. Swab testing is currently our main focus because relatively few people have had the virus at this point in the pandemic. Swab tests can tell us what treatment the patient should receive when they come into hospital, who needs to be isolated in any care service and which key workers who are currently self isolating can safely return to work. Some two thirds of those that we’ve been testing have returned to work, which is very gratifying, and we’ve seen some reductions in the NHS sickness absence results as a result."
"580","John Newton: (15:46);In hospitals or care homes where social distancing is more difficult to achieve, testing is vital to help control outbreaks of infection where they occur. And finally, swab tests can help us understand the spread of the across the population through carefully designed surveys of the type the secretary of state just described, the one led by the Office of National Statistics and Oxford University. Now, although a positive swab test is very reliable, I want to stress the negative result does not absolutely guarantee that you’re free of the virus. It is, however, a very good guide for whether it’s safe to return to work. Blood testing, by contrast, can tell us who has previously had the infection, again, improving our understanding of the spread of the virus when you used in surveys. And in individuals, it may also be able to tell us about the risks of future infection, which of course is so important."
"581","John Newton: (16:44);Now, if you have had the virus, you may have acquired some degree of immunity. I stress may because the science on immunity is still uncertain and in any case it also takes some time for that immunity to build up and for the test to be positive. Our five pillar national testing program is designed to ensure that everyone who needs a test can have one. To make that happen, we’re doing two things, increasing capacity for testing and increasing access. May I have the first slide please on testing? Here we can see that our secretary of state said we’ve now performed more than 500,000 tests in the UK, which is and has been steadily increasing over time."
"582","John Newton: (17:33);If I could have the second slide please. This slide shows the increase in the capacity to undertake tests, and we’re talking here about the swab tests and compared to the start of the month, you can see that we have increased substantially so that we can now do more than 51,000 tests a day. And the shape of the curve is exponential. You can see that it’s rapidly increasing at this point, which is what we expected. Now, we’ve done this by securing supplies of kits and consumables from some of the leading manufacturers that secretary of state mentioned, and now these are the very best of their kind available in the world. We’ve also introduced new tests, new types of tests, so at least, for example, at least two NHS labs are now using a test that has no RNA extraction stage, which means no need for the chemical reagents, which are in such high demand around the world. And we’ve also developed technology within the NHS to direct capacity to where it’s needed most, and that’s made a huge difference."
"583","John Newton: (18:39);In addition, we have the three new lighthouse labs, which are all now on stream. These are the ones in Milton Keynes, in Manchester and in Glasgow. Each of these labs will be able to process tens of thousands of tests per day and we’re introducing automation into those processes, which really ramps up the capacity. We’ve also entered into partnerships with leading labs in industry and academia, in addition to these other labs I’ve mentioned already, and this will help increase volume still further. So we are currently on track to reach 100,000 tests per day as planned. In fact, we’re somewhat ahead of where we thought we would be at this stage. Now, a huge amount of work has gone into this across the board, and I want to take this opportunity to thank everyone involved."
"584","John Newton: (19:28);Next we’re increasing access to testing. So if I could have the next slide please. So you can see here from the map particularly we already have more than 30 drive through centers, and these are increasing to around 48. As the secretary of state mentioned, home testing option is also now in place, and we will increase this further. We also want to use an approach we call a satellite approach where test kits are delivered in batches to a single site and then returned in batches, and then finally, as you heard, we are also currently working with the army on a new pop-up mobile testing option which was developed for us by the army, and it was really working very well. So we’re going to have 48 of these pop up facilities which can travel around the country to where they’re needed most. For example, in care homes."
"585","John Newton: (20:23);Now, a key development that will transform access is the web portals for employers and for essential workers to refer themselves for a test. All of this together means that any essential worker or member of their household who has symptoms and would benefit from a test, will be able to get one. At the same time, we are developing new and better blood tests. Now, these could be used to help people assess their individual risk, although, as I said, the science on this is incomplete and the existing tests on the market do not work well enough for individual advice. In fact, no country in the world is using them for that purpose. The existing tests can however be used with care in surveys to understand the spread of the virus. So just like our national effort on vaccines, the UK’s top scientists are working with industry and the NHS to develop better blood tests."
"586","John Newton: (21:19);We’ve made good progress and several candidate tests and now being evaluated. Once we’ve identified the accurate tests, they can be provided in labs in large quantities relatively easily, much more easy to scale up than the swab tests. And finally, a public private consortium, the UK rapid test consortium is working on a method of getting antibody tests to people at home. So of course all this testing capacity is needed now, but not just now, also for the future to support the government’s strategy as we move to the next stage of the response to the pandemic. In the coming weeks and months, as you’ve heard from secretary state, we will need testing to keep the virus under control with a test, track, and trace program. We will also need, as I’ve mentioned, intensive testing in settings like hospitals and care homes, including of people who may not have symptoms, to prevent spread, protect staff and save lives."
"587","John Newton: (22:17);Finally we will need testing capacity to support these large repeated surveys of the population to assess the ongoing situation. So let me summarize the current state of play as far as testing goes. We have exponentially increased our testing capacity and we are on target to have capacity for 100,000 tests a day. We’re opening up access so that all essential workers and members of their household who have symptoms and could benefit from a test can get one. At the same time, as we’ve heard from Sir Patrick, the success of social distancing has almost certainly reduced the number of people who would benefit from a test at this stage of the pandemic. Perhaps most important though is that as we move to the next phase of the response to the pandemic, I can say with confidence that we will have the testing capability that we need. Thank you."
"588","Matt Hancock: (23:08);Thanks very much John, and now we’ll open up to questions. The first question, Laura Coonsburg of the BBC."
"589","Laura Coonsburg: (23:16);Thank you very much, secretary of state. There is broad public support for the lockdown, but the Scottish first minister, the opposition and some of your own MPs think you should be more transparent about what might come next. Are they all wrong? Because the five tests you’ve set out are all about when it might be time, but not about how we might move on into that next phase. And if I could ask Sir Patrick, what do you think the gap between the peaks in terms of time could be in different parts of the country? Thanks."
"590","Matt Hancock: (23:46);Thanks, Laura. Well, I understand the thirst for knowledge, but the tests that we’ve set out, which are the basis from which others, for instance, the Scottish government have then developed their plans, those tests are the critical tests for when changes can be made. And of course monitoring what’s happening and making sure that we move at the right time is absolutely critical. But the message remains to your viewers and to everybody across the country, the message remains the same, that people need to stay at home to protect the NHS and save lives. And the reason that we have clarity on that message is that it has succeeded in bringing down and flattening the curve, but we are not through that yet. And there’s an awful lot of work that still needs to be done, and we’re absolutely determined to avoid a second peak. So we’ve set out precisely, as you say, the five tests for when we should move. We haven’t met them yet and therefore we must keep the social distancing measures in place. Patrick?"
"591","Sir Patrick Vallance: (24:59);It’s worth remembering that what we’ve done has really suppressed the numbers. So this isn’t a natural peak. This is a suppressed peak. And I think London is ahead of the rest of the country maybe by a couple of weeks, but there’s quite a lot of synchrony right across the country actually, it’s not massively different, so I can’t be absolutely sure about this, but I think two or three weeks is the sort of order where you might expect to see some differences across the country."
"592","Matt Hancock: (25:26);Thanks very much. Robert Peston, ITV."
"593","Speaker 3: (25:30);[ inaudible 00:12:30]."
"594","Matt Hancock: (25:32);Thanks Robert."
"595","Robert Peston: (25:34);Good afternoon. Couple of quick ones. First of all, if you look at the ICNARC intensive care surveys, it does seem that people who are overweight are more at risk of becoming acutely ill, but being overweight is not something that on the whole you talk about it as a risk factor. Is being overweight a risk factor, and secondly, just to Sir Patrick, it wasn’t that long ago, Sir Patrick, that you said-"
"596","Robert Peston: (26:02);… 20,000 deaths would be a good result. It’s very clear there are going to be more than 20,000 deaths. This is not a blame thing, but what have you learned about this virus and how it’s behaving, explains why it’s going to be considerably more than 20,000 deaths? Do you have a sense of, in this phase, how many deaths we’re likely to see?"
"597","Matt Hancock: (26:27);Thanks Robert. I’ll ask John to answer the first and Patrick to answer the second."
"598","John Newton: (26:32);Yes. Thank you, Secretary of State. Well, yes Robert, the data you mentioned showed a number of differences between the characteristics of people receiving care for coronavirus and the general population. In fact, Secretary of State has asked Public Health England to undertake a detailed piece of research to look into this working with academic colleagues. So we’re certainly looking at the relationship between obesity and outcomes, but also a number of other factors such as ethnicity, age, and gender even are all important factors."
"599","John Newton: (27:04);So there’s quite a lot of work to do. In the data that we have, there are some techniques to try and assess by linkage and so on how important these differences are. So there’s a certain amount of statistical work to do, but it should be possible to get an answer to some of those questions reasonably soon."
"600","Matt Hancock: (27:26);Thanks very much. Patrick."
"601","Sir Patrick Vallance: (27:28);In a way, your first question to some extent, answers the second one. There’s a lot we don’t know about this virus. I mean, it’s odd that you see this obesity signal. It’s odd that its got such a gender difference. There are lots of things about this new virus that we don’t understand. There are lots of things that are being learned quite fast. There are lots of things that we need to understand about the immunity to it."
"602","Sir Patrick Vallance: (27:49);In terms of the numbers of deaths, I think it’s difficult to speculate exactly what that will look like at the end of this. It’s very clear that there have been large numbers right the way across the world. And I think the key statistic that we need to look at going forward is the overall excess deaths, which encompasses direct and indirect, as the CMOs laid out repeatedly. So I’m not going to try and put a number on that. Clearly every death is absolutely regrettable and affects many people. And our job is to try to make sure we suppress this as far as we can and keep those numbers down."
"603","Matt Hancock: (28:27);Thanks very much. Beth Rigby at Sky."
"604","Beth Rigby: (28:31);Thank you, Secretary of State. Mr. Hancock, first a question for you. Does a proper scale dock testing and tracing system have to be up and running before you’re even countenance ease in the lockdown? And if so, can you get that ready by May the 7th? And to Sir Patrick, if I may, do you intend to establish what you think is a tolerable level of community transmission based on not overwhelming the NHS, so allowing some spread of the virus through the population? Or is your aim to push daily new cases as low as possible to control the virus?"
"605","Matt Hancock: (29:13);Well, thanks. Both of those questions are ultimately for politicians because they are the big judgments. I’ll ask Patrick to comment on the science of the latter, but ultimately the judgements are made by the Cabinet on the advice of the scientists."
"606","Matt Hancock: (29:34);On the first, there is no automatic link between the two. There is no automatic link between the scale of test, track and trace and any changes to the social distancing measures. So I wouldn’t put a deadline on it in the way that you did. What I would say is that test, track and trace, done effectively, can help to suppress the transmission in a way that allows you then to have lesser social distancing rules. And critically, test, track and trace works more effectively when the rate of new cases is lower. So the lower the rate of new cases, the more effectively you can keep it down using test, track and trace rather than having to use heavier social distancing measures."
"607","Matt Hancock: (30:32);So the link between the two is in fact, that once you have full-blown tracking and tracing with the test capacity that, as John set out, we’re increasing, that allows you to hold down the level of transmission under lesser social distancing rules. But you’ve got to get it down there first for test track, and trace to be effective."
"608","Matt Hancock: (30:58);And that comes to the second point, which is that our objective is to get the rate of transmission down. And that seems to have happened because instead of an exponential rise as we saw before, we now see a flattening of the curve. And then crucially, to get the level of transmission down as in the number of new cases. So it’s both about the rate of change and the level. So it appears that we have got the rate, R figure, the rate of transmission lower because we’ve flattened the curve, but we’ve got to see the number of cases as well, come down because then you can use test, track and trace to hold it down."
"609","Matt Hancock: (31:41);So that’s the way that those two things fit together and it’s all part of a piece, and both of your questions are entirely tied to each other, which is why all of this becomes a strategic question rather than purely a scientific question. But it is of course based on the science. Patrick does that …"
"610","Sir Patrick Vallance: (31:59);Absolutely right. I mean, we advised on what measures needed to be put in place to keep the numbers down below NHS critical care capacity. That was absolutely crucial, and looks like that has been achieved. And therefore that’s one really important step. And we are advising now on what measures need to be in place in order to get those numbers lower for the reasons Secretary of State said, and what numbers are necessary in order to get down to trace and test, track and trace approaches. But the decision on how far to go and which measures should be released and so on are ones for ministers."
"611","Matt Hancock: (32:41);Thanks very much Beth. Ben Kentish from LBC."
"612","Ben Kentish: (32:46);Thank you Secretary of State. Everyone agrees that the contact, the track and trace method that you’ve been talking about is going to be very important in the coming weeks. I wondered if I could just ask you to give us a few specifics. How many of those 18,000 traces are in place? When do you think you need to get to the 18,000? How low roughly, do case numbers need to be before track and trace can start to be in any way effective."
"613","Ben Kentish: (33:12);And just a second question, if I may, on science and face masks. We were behind other countries in going into lockdown. We’ve been behind other countries in scaling up our testing capacity, and it seems we are behind other countries in the use of face masks. When I asked about this two weeks ago, for example, that there was no effective [inaudible 00:33:35], and that advice may change. Is there a sense though that we are a bit slow compared to other countries in following the science, at a risk that delay might mean, given other countries have been buying face masks for their citizens for many weeks now, that there is a problem when it comes to British people having access, given international shortages, to effective protection face masks."
"614","Matt Hancock: (33:58);Thanks very much. So on the first question, we’re recruiting now, and we’ve set out in the first instance that we’re recruiting 18,000, of whom 3000 will be clinical personnel, and train up the other 15,000. That process is ongoing. And in terms of when it will be ready, it’s in a matter of weeks. And that will then help, but critically it’s needed when we get the level of transmission down."
"615","Matt Hancock: (34:31);On the second question, we’ve discussed the timings many times before. I don’t accept the premise of the question because we followed the science throughout this, building on that science. And the science develops as we learn more about the virus."
"616","Matt Hancock: (34:51);And as for making sure that we are ready for any change in the science, many countries have been buying face masks, as have we. But the position on face masks is unchanged. We, of course constantly the science on that is being reviewed, and we’ll consider updated scientific advice if that’s what we get as and when we need to. And also consider the sort of knock-on implications that you talk about because it is absolutely critical that the face masks that we buy are first and foremost for people in the NHS and Social Care and other places where they are clearly in clinical need. And that’s what we’ve been buying the face masks for."
"617","Matt Hancock: (35:35);Patrick, anything to add on that?"
"618","Sir Patrick Vallance: (35:36);I don’t think so. I mean, the evidence on face masks has always been quite variable, quite weak, quite difficult to know exactly. And there’s no real trials on it. And we’ve undertaken a review, we’ll give our advice to ministers and they’ll make decisions about what to do around that."
"619","Matt Hancock: (35:52);Thanks very much. Macer Hall from the Express."
"620","Macer Hall: (35:56);Thank you Secretary of State. Question first to Sir Patrick. In the early stages of this crisis, you’ve told us that social distancing measures shouldn’t be introduced too quickly because of the dangers of longterm public fatigue. What is your behavioral modeling telling you now about the public’s willingness to continue enduring these restrictions? And is the increased road traffic and people on the streets that we’ve seen this week, is that a sign that some people’s patience is beginning to wear out?"
"621","Macer Hall: (36:24);And Secretary of State, as we prepare to applaud our NHS workers again tonight, can you tell us what progress the government has made into providing improved support for the relatives of those doctors, nurses and other medical staff who lose their lives in this emergency? Dozens of MPs have been calling for a scheme similar to that that operates for grieved armed forces families. Is this something that you would consider?"
"622","Matt Hancock: (36:48);Thank you very much, Macer. I’ll ask Sir Patrick to answer the first on the endurance of people’s support for the lockdown measures. All I’d say is I think it’s been absolutely phenomenal how the British people have responded when we’ve asked them to do something that is quite difficult to follow those new social distancing rules. They have risen to that and I’m very proud of them."
"623","Matt Hancock: (37:20);On the second point, of course it isn’t just applause for the NHS, it’s clap for our carers, including Social Care. And I think one of the good things about this crisis is the clarity with which people who work in Social Care and do such important work that I have seen, that the country cares for and is grateful to them too."
"624","Matt Hancock: (37:44);On the important question that you ask about support for the families of those who’ve lost their lives, of course is something that I’m looking into, and I hope to be able to say something more about it very soon. Patrick."
"625","Sir Patrick Vallance: (37:59);Well, on the social distancing, we said at the outset that it’s important to break transmission between households to lower the rate of transmission. And social distancing clearly is the way that you can do that, and it needs to be sustainable. And I think if you look at the evidence, the data actually looks like people are really doing a very, very good job in that. And it is sustaining. So I don’t think there’s evidence that this is tailing off, and it’s important that we carry on with it for all the reasons that have been said. So I think at the moment things look very good there and it is reducing the R, it has reduced the R dramatically, and we suspect there will be far fewer infections in the community as a result."
"626","Matt Hancock: (38:39);Final thing I’d say Macer, is that I pay tribute to the support that the Daily Express has shown for our health and care staff throughout this crisis with constant messages of support, which I know that my colleagues appreciate. Joe Murphy from the Evening Standard."
"627","Joe Murphy: (39:01);Secretary of State-"
"628","Joe Murphy: (39:04);… It’s really encouraging to see that curve for London coming down. So Patrick said London was two weeks ahead of other regions. Wouldn’t it make sense, and perhaps save thousands of firms from going bust, and hundreds of thousands of jobs from being lost if London could stop coming out of lockdown two weeks ahead of regions who also lucky at the moment? And could I just ask Professor Newton at the same time, doctors are telling us that you can’t rely on certificates of cause of death to make figures on how many patients have died. Sorry … How many people in the community have died of coronavirus because doctors are not always writing COVID-19 on the certificate because they don’t know without a test. Wouldn’t it make sense to start testing every person who dies in a care home with any sorts of symptoms so that the figures can be more accurate?"
"629","Matt Hancock: (40:01);Thank you. I’ll ask Sir Patrick to answer the first, and Professor Newton to answer the second. The only thing I want to add is that the point about supporting those who live in care homes is incredibly important and front of mind, and we’ve already expanded the availability of testing to those in care homes, including to asymptomatic residents in care homes. It’s a very important part of the testing program. Sir Patrick."
"630","Sir Patrick Vallance: (40:38);What I said was that there’s more similarities than differences, and there may be up to two or three weeks differences in some places. So it’s not that London’s two weeks ahead of everywhere. There is actually a lot of similarities across a number of areas, including big urban areas. So I don’t think you should take the message at all that there is two weeks difference between London and the rest of the country. They may be up to two weeks in some parts of the country. That’s the point."
"631","Sir Patrick Vallance: (41:04);In terms of releasing measures, you’ve only had to look at the way in which this disease can spread in cities and in urban environments to know that the release of the measure is something you want to do absolutely when you’re sure you’ve got on top of it, that’s the right time to do it, and to make sure that you don’t get reimportation across the country. So how this is done I think is a matter for ministers to make decisions on. But you can see it’s really not the straightforward as saying because you hit the peak two weeks early, you can release things two weeks early. It depends on absolute numbers and it depends on a number of other factors."
"632","Matt Hancock: (41:40);Thanks Joe. Did you have another? Sorry? Of course."
"633","John Newton: (41:44);Yes. So Joe, you’re absolutely right. So one of the reasons for wanting to have more available testing is to get better statistics and understand the data better. But in fact, we have always been testing people, residents in care homes. Over 11,000 people have already been tested in care homes and the Secretary of State, we’re rolling out very significant capacity to test all people in care homes. But in any case, Public Health England has been looking at these days at carefully."
"634","John Newton: (42:08);So we’re able to, even if the doctor doesn’t write coronavirus on the desk certificate, we know by linking together the data that we have on the test with national records when a patient dies, which goes through to a national register. So we were already able to pick up quite a lot that way and so we will have been missing a few, but perhaps not as many as your question implied, but it’s very important to emphasize the fact that we need better data in care homes and that will help us to look after people, protect them, and save lives in care homes as well as in the NHS."
"635","Matt Hancock: (42:46);Okay. Thanks Joe. I’ve got Dr. Cove from the Brighton Argus."
"636","Dr. Cove: (42:55);Yeah. Good afternoon. It was 46 days between the first case in Brighton and Hove and a nursing home in the city calling out for proper protective equipment and testing after a cluster of cases among patients and staff. What steps has the government now taken to reduce outbreaks in care homes and have you considered limiting agency workers to one or two homes to reduce the spread between them? Secondly, many people are still coming down to Brighton Beach, flouting lockdown rules, despite efforts from the local council and police. What else can be done to limit the number of people coming to destinations like Brighton on the weekend?"
"637","Matt Hancock: (43:30);Well, thanks very much Jody. There’s a huge effort underway to limit the spread of this disease in care homes and I followed the reports from the care homes in Brighton very closely and as you say, there was a significant gap between the first positive case in Brighton and the first reported cases in care homes. What we’ve been able to do recently is expand the amount of testing so that anybody who has symptoms in a care home now gets tested."
"638","Matt Hancock: (44:07);And as of yesterday we’ve introduced the testing of people who don’t have symptoms in care homes for exactly the sort of reasons that you set out. So that everybody who can benefit from a test, who is a resident in a care home can now get a test. The amount of work that’s gone on reflects the importance of supporting people who live in care homes and trying to make sure that they are protected, not least because people who live in care homes are often amongst the most vulnerable to this disease."
"639","Matt Hancock: (44:49);As for people going to the beach in Brighton, I think the police have done a good job. I’ve also seen reports of the police stopping people from having barbecues on the beach and making sure that people follow the social distancing rules, and the rules are there for a reason and that’s because people need to follow the rules in order to protect the NHS and to slow the spread of this virus. What I’d say to people in Brighton, and the rest of the country, is that the measures that we’re taking are working, they’re supported by the vast majority of people in this country, and everyone should follow the social distancing rules because that is how we come through this as a city and as a country."
"640","Matt Hancock: (45:37);Finally, Hannah Rodger from the Herald."
"641","Hannah Rodger: (45:46);Hello."
"642","Matt Hancock: (45:47);Hello."
"643","Hannah Rodger: (45:48);Hi there. So I’ve got a question for the Secretary of State, and one for Sir Patrick. So today the Scottish government has produced a detailed 25 page report on their exit strategy from the lockdown. Nicola Sturgeon, our first minister say that she wants to have an adult discussion, and she wants to receive feedback from the Scottish public on her plan. My question to you is, why has the UK government been unable thus far to produce a similarly detailed plan, which not only can be scrutinized by the members of the public, but can also be used to get people some hope?"
"644","Hannah Rodger: (46:28);My question for Sir Patrick is, the Scottish government report today says, one of the ways forward out of the lockdown could be to vary restrictions based on geography, professional sector, and by specific demographics, and groups of the population. Do you agree that this is something that should be considered, and is it something that you yourself might take into consideration when looking at the exit strategy for the UK?"
"645","Matt Hancock: (46:59);Thanks very much Hannah. We’ve set out the five tests that are needed for us to make changes to the lockdown measures, and the Scottish government’s proposals are based on those tests. I think that having the four nations of the UK work together on this has been important thus far, not just on social distancing but also for instance on testing, and I think that the country has essentially moved together, and you can see that in the flattening of the curve which has essentially happened in all regions and nations of the UK together. I think that it’s important that us having set out the test, and now the Scottish government having set out their approach, which is very similar, and based on those five tests we’ve set out, I think that the UK wide approach is the best way to go. Patrick."
"646","Sir Patrick Vallance: (48:10);Just to echo that the scientists are all working together and actually we’re very closely working with the chair of the Scottish Science Advisory group who joins us as well for all our meetings and we share information and we look at all the same things, and the modeling is shared so that people don’t have to repeat what others are doing. So this is very much a unified approach to looking at the different options and the impact that they could have in terms of social distancing, which is the key thing. How do you make sure you reduce the contact in a way that allows the r to stay below one, and allow things to return more towards normal in due course."
"647","Matt Hancock: (48:53);Thanks very much indeed. That concludes the Downing Street coronavirus briefing for today, and I’ll no doubt see you again soon. Thank you."
"648","Matt Hancock: (00:00);Today’s briefing will follow a bit of a new format following significant demand as well as questions from the media. We’ll take our first question from a member of the public. This is going to become a regular feature of these briefings. The questions are selected by an independent polling organization and just like the journalist questions, we don’t see the questions in advance, but we’ll give them the very best answers that we can. In the past few hours, since we announced this new approach, we’ve had over 15,000 questions submitted and you can ask a question yourself by going to gov.uk\ask. And today I’m joined by Professor Chris Whitty and Professor Steve Powis, the medical director of the NHS. The government is working through our action plan and at its core the objective is to protect life and to protect the NHS both by slowing the spread of the virus so that we flatten the curve and by ensuring that the NHS always has more than enough capacity to provide critical care for all those who need it."
"649","Matt Hancock: (01:18);According to the most recent figures, there have been 719,910 tests for coronavirus so far in the UK, including 37,024 yesterday. 157,149 people have tested positive. That’s an increase of 4,310 cases since yesterday. 15,051 people are currently in hospital with coronavirus, down from 15,239 yesterday and sadly of those hospitalized with the virus, 21,092 have now died. That’s an increase of 360 fatalities. And we must never lose sight of the human cost of coronavirus and the pain and the grief that it causes. And each death serves as a reminder that we must stand firm in our resolve. Sadly, these deaths figures include 82 NHS colleagues and 16 colleagues who work in social care. They dedicated their lives to caring for others and I feel a deep personal sense of duty that we must care for their loved ones. Today, I’m able to announce that the government is setting up a life assurance scheme for NHS and social care frontline colleagues."
"650","Matt Hancock: (02:54);Families of staff who die from coronavirus in the course of their essential frontline work will receive a 60,000 pound payment. Of course, nothing replaces the loss of a loved one, but we want to do everything that we can to support families who are dealing with this grief. And as a government, we’re looking closely at other professions that work on the frontline against coronavirus who also do not have access to such schemes to see where this may be required. This gross crisis has shown this country values so much our health and social care workers and I want to pay tribute to the perseverance of the British public who, even this warm spring weekend, in the vast majority did the right thing and stayed at home to protect the NHS. Thus far in this crisis at every single hour of every single day the NHS has always had the capacity to treat the people who need that treatment."
"651","Matt Hancock: (04:09);I’m glad to be able to report that there are now 3,190 spare critical care beds. Indeed, 42% of oxygen supported beds in the NHS now lie empty. And in most parts of the country, the number of people in hospital with coronavirus is beginning to fall. One of the reasons NHS capacity has always exceeded need is because of our amazing program of NHS Nightingale Hospitals. Today, I was proud to attend virtually the opening of the eighth of our 10 Nightingale Hospitals across the UK. Again, built in a matter of weeks. This Nightingale Hospital Project stands as a monument to the nation’s ability to get things done when it matters. This is one of the most ambitious projects this country has ever seen in peace time and I’d like to thank the NHS, the armed forces, and all the companies that have worked side by side to make these plans of reality."
"652","Matt Hancock: (05:12);The Nightingale Project is just one of the measures that’s boosted capacity all across the NHS. By reenlisting thousands of former staff, former clinicians, and enrolling early thousands of students. We’ve boosted the workforce of the NHS and we’ve changed forever the digital capability of the NHS. I think many people who’ve now used online GP consultations and online outpatient visits won’t ever go back. And I pay tribute to the staff who’ve worked in different ways to how they would ever have imagined and who’ve been more flexible and open to change when it was really needed. So where there have been advances amongst these huge challenges of this crisis, we must not lose them. However, we also know that fewer people are coming to the NHS when they need to and the attendances have dropped to 221,000 emergency department attendances in the last week compared to 477,000 in the same week last year."
"653","Matt Hancock: (06:20);That’s more than 50%. Now some of this drop is due to lower road traffic and people following the social distancing rules. Some of it will be due to people accessing the NHS in ways that work better for them, like online or through pharmacies. And that’s a good thing. But in some cases we know that the drop is due to people not coming forward and using the NHS for critical things that matter. Our message is that the NHS is open. Help us to help you. So if you’re worried about chest pains, for instance, maybe you might be having a heart attack or a stroke, or you feel a lump and you’re worried about cancer or you’re a parent concerned about your child, please come forward and seek help as you always would. It is so important that everybody uses the NHS responsibly and the NHS will always be there for you when you need it just as it’s been there for us all throughout this crisis and throughout our lives."
"654","Matt Hancock: (07:27);And as the number of hospitalizations from coronavirus begins to fall, I can announce that starting tomorrow we’ll begin the restoration of other NHS services starting with the most urgent, like cancer care and mental health support. The exact pace of the restoration will be determined by local circumstances on the ground according to local need and according to the amount of a coronavirus cases that that hospital is having to deal with. Having written off 13.4 billion pounds worth of historic NHS debt, I want to ensure that the NHS is always there in a way that doesn’t just help us recover from coronavirus as a country, but also puts us in a stronger position for the future. We’re coming through this peak. We’ll honor those who’ve dedicated their lives to caring for others, but it will count for nothing if we let things slip now and risk a second peak. I know that lockdown is hard for so many people, but let us all have the resolve to see this through. So please stay at home, protect the NHS, and save lives. We’re now going to go to Professor Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for the daily data charts, and then we’re going to take questions from the public."
"655","Professor Chris Whitty: (08:56);Thank you very much, Secretary of State. So just the first slide is just a reminder to people of the five tests for adjusting the lockdown. The first three of which are about the epidemic that the NHS has capacity to provide critical care across the UK, a sustained and consistent fall in the daily deaths overall from coronavirus, and the rate of infection decreased to manageable levels across the board. Then there’s an operational point about operational challenges including testing and PPE in hand with supply, able to meet future demand, and then finally and importantly confident that the adjustments to current measures will not risk a second peak of infections. Next slide please."
"656","Professor Chris Whitty: (09:44);The next two slides are really ways of looking at whether people are continuing as they have been consistently throughout this crisis to heed the guidance in terms of keeping pressure off the NHS by staying at home unless they have to go out for necessary things. And as you can see, after a very remarkable fall, initially, broadly, this has been flat, very slight trending up in terms of motor vehicles, but otherwise really the data remain largely unchanged on these transport metrics."
"657","Professor Chris Whitty: (10:18);Next slide please. And then looking at other forms, the driving we’ve talked about before. A very slight increase in walking. Public transport remains largely flat. So evidence, I think, that the great majority of people are continuing to honor the lockdown, which is helping us to drive the number of cases down and therefore take pressure off the NHS. Next slide please."
"658","Professor Chris Whitty: (10:44);The next few slides are really ones that people who watch these briefings will be very familiar with. It’s just the most recent data. So new cases in the UK. As you can see, obviously one thing we have to bear in mind is the number of tests is going up overall, but despite that the trend is flat or slightly down in terms of positive cases. Next slide please. But when we actually look at people in hospital, I think the trends that demonstrate that over the country as a whole, we’re going through the peak are reasonably clear to see. Obviously a bigger fall in London, but the rest of the country in different areas are either flat or decreasing over time. Next slide please. And then when we turn to one of the most important questions, which is critical care capacity, if you look at these trends across England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland, these are the percentage of all critical care beds being used for covid patients and both in absolute and in relative terms this is gradually trending down."
"659","Professor Chris Whitty: (11:55);But importantly, and I talked about this last time I was here, this is a very gradual peak. We’re not seeing a dramatic falloff and nor do we expect to in the next short while. Next slide please. And finally, sadly, people are continuing to die as we have said. Every time just after a weekend, there’s an artificial drop because there’s less notification over weekends. So the number of cases who sadly were reported as having died yesterday with 360 I do actually expect there will be a bit of an uptick again later in the week as we catch up from the weekend drop. Nevertheless, the trend overall, as you can see from the seven day rolling average at the top, which smooths out these weekend effects, is a gradual decline. But we are definitely not consistently past the peak across the whole country at this point in time. Finally, a slide which compares different countries, and again I would be really clear that we should not over-interpret the absolute numbers. The way these are actually measured in different countries is different, but the trend lines I think are reasonably clear from this. Thank you very much."
"660","Matt Hancock: (13:14);Thank you very much Chris. Now we’re going to go to the first question, which is from Lynn in Skipton. And I’m going to read out the question, and I’m reading it for the first time, and then we will endeavor to answer it. I’m missing my grandchildren so much. Please can you let me know if after the five criteria are met, is being able to hug our closest family one of the first steps out of lockdown. Well, thank you Lynn for that question. An incredibly important one and brings home the emotional impact of the lockdown measures. I think why don’t we take the direct medical evidence from the chief medical officer?"
"661","Professor Chris Whitty: (13:59);Well very clearly for most people, the ability to actually interact with families in a way that they have not been able to during this period is absolutely essential. In terms of the direct answer to this lady’s question, it depends, if I’m honest, on the situation that she finds herself in. So if she is someone who has a significant medical problem in a way that means that she would have to be shielding that is, and she’s an older person. Some grandparents are younger grandparents, some obviously are older. If she’s in a group which is vulnerable, then the answer is that it might well be prudent, and this will be depend entirely on individual circumstances, for her not to get into a situation where she is putting herself at risk. Obviously if she’s healthy and younger, that may well not be true, but the overall view that actually one of the things that clearly is important to everybody is the ability to get together with families remotely, but also physically everyone fully accepts. Nevertheless, it is important that people who are vulnerable continue to be protected even after whatever the next steps are occur."
"662","Matt Hancock: (15:16);Thank you. And the thing I’d say to Lynn directly is that we understand the impact of not being able to hug your closest family. It affects all of us too, as well as the direct health impacts of the lockdown, bringing down the curve and trying to stop this terrible disease. And also the economic impacts, which are clearly very significant. There are also the direct emotional bonds because it’s one of the most natural things in the world to want to hug a member of a family. And we just hope we can get back to that as soon as possible. And the best way we can get there fastest is for people to follow the rules so we can get those five…"
"663","Matt Hancock: (16:03);… is for people to follow the rules so we can get those five criteria met as soon as possible. I don’t know if you wanted to add anything."
"664","Speaker 2: (16:07);I have only to add that we all know how hard this is. My own mother lives hundreds of miles away and I know she’s wondering when she will be seeing me and her grandchildren again. This is really tough, but as the Secretary of State have said, it is bearing fruit in that we are seeing reduction in the number of hospital admissions. We’re seeing a reduction in the number of deaths, and it’s only by the British public continuing to comply with that guidance until the time is right that we will all continue to see a reduction in deaths, which I know has touched so many people around the country in terms of loved ones."
"665","Matt Hancock: (16:43);Thank you very much, Lynn, for your question and for submitting it. And I hope that, I think that’s shown that the questions from the members of the public can be just as informative and can be just as difficult to answer as questions from journalists who are trained to ask them. Talking of which Hugh Pym from the BBC."
"666","Hugh Pym: (17:11);Thank you very much. Question for the Secretary of State. It’s about testing particularly important in the short term, at least for up to 10 million key workers and their families. We’re hearing varying reports on how easy it might be or not to book tests online. What do you say to that and do you think you will hit your target of a hundred thousand tests a day by the end of this month? That’s later this week."
"667","Matt Hancock: (17:35);Well, thank you. I think we are on track to the hundred thousand target. We’re broadly where we expected to be. You’ve seen a big increase over the weekend to 37,000 tests yesterday. Now we are also enhancing and making it easier to access how you get a hold of tests. The home tests have been particularly popular. We delivered 5,681 of those yesterday. And that is all about being able to make the testing as easy for people who, if you’ve got symptoms you’re by the nature of the thing you are already ill, and so we want to make it as easy as possible to get hold of those tests, alongside it still we’re opening more and more drive through centers. So we’re broadly where we expected to be and we’ve got a lot of work the rest of this week to keep continuing the ramp up to the goal that I so clearly set up. Thanks, Hugh."
"668","Hugh Pym: (18:43);Can I ask a follow up?"
"669","Matt Hancock: (18:44);Yes, of course."
"670","Hugh Pym: (18:45);Beyond this it’s very important to escalate testing capacity significantly to prevent or help prevent a second spike. Where do you want to be with capacity and testing ability in a few months time? How many hundred of thousands a day?"
"671","Matt Hancock: (19:01);So this is a really important question and of course the reason that I set the goal and that we’re working so hard towards it is because testing is an important part of how we keep the spread of the virus down, especially once we’ve got the number of new cases down through the social distancing measures. So we want testing to continue to increase. As you’ll know, the Prime Minister set a goal of 250,000 sometime ago, especially for when the antibody tests come on stream. But so far there isn’t one of those that is clinically valid. So we’ll keep on increasing. It’s important to note that we’ve already gone past the number of tests per day, for instance, that they carry out in South Korea. We’re approaching the levels that Germany undertakes. So, it’s a project to keep increasing."
"672","Matt Hancock: (20:06);Also, we need to think very hard and take the clinical advice on how to use those tests. For instance, we’re putting far more into care homes. We’re making sure that now NHS staff get tested, including when they’re asymptomatic, to make sure that we understand where the people who are working in hospitals have got the virus and using the tests for surveys. The Office for National Statistics have got a survey for instance in the field right now and with people being tested this week to find out how many people have got the virus, how many have had the virus, the critical questions that we need to know the answers to. So I don’t know if you want to add anything Chris, but the point is, it’s a really important question because testing is a critical part of controlling the virus once we get the number of new cases down."
"673","Chris Whitty: (21:07);Only thing to add is that the more testing capacity you’ve got them, the more flexibility you have to do different things, with both the patients and in terms of things like care homes as the Secretary of State was saying."
"674","Matt Hancock: (21:19);Thanks, Hugh. Robert Peston ITV."
"675","Robert Peston: (21:23);Good afternoon. On the life insurance scheme, will overseas healthcare workers working in the NHS and those who come back to the NHS temporarily, will they qualify for this life insurance? Right now they don’t for example, qualify for normal death in service benefits. And the question I think largely for Chris Whitty, more or less the most important test you’ve set is the transmission rate, the so called R has to fall to a 0.5 so in language you can all understand on average it will take two infected people to infect one other person. What’s the magic of that 0.5? Why does it give you comfort? And also since we still don’t know how many people are walking around with funny symptoms or no symptoms at all who have the virus, how can you be remotely confident that you will get there. Neil Ferguson said he thinks that the number is currently O.6 to O.7, but how can we possibly be confident of that?"
"676","Matt Hancock: (22:24);I’ll take first question, Robert. The answer is yes. This is for frontline staff working in the NHS and in social care, who die and are employees within the NHS and social care. And as I say, we’re also looking at which other groups of key workers that applies to and who don’t have a scheme already in place. Chris?"
"677","Chris Whitty: (22:52);0.5, can I just correct? I don’t recall ever saying that the target was 0.5. What I have said is that it’s in the range 0.5 to one at the present time, probably somewhere in the middle of that range. And the second thing which I have said is that it is really important we do not go above one. That one is an absolute target. And the reason for that is that once it goes above one for any prolonged period of time, I mean it might just flick up for a short period, then you go back to exponential growth and then a short sooner or later, depending on how much above one it is, you get back to the situation, the NHS is threatened to be overwhelmed because exponential growth goes from very small numbers to very large numbers very fast."
"678","Chris Whitty: (23:33);So I would like to clarify that it’s not going above one is the longterm target. Clearly the lower we can get it at the moment the better. But as I say, it’s probably in the middle of the range 0.5 to one at the present and that is bringing down the R, which is what you’re actually seeing when you look at the critical care and other metrics we looked at in the slides."
"679","Matt Hancock: (23:56);Thanks very much. Yeah, or course."
"680","Robert Peston: (23:59);Could I? One extra thing, actually just on the life insurance, and just to be clear, there’s nothing in this life insurance scheme that would waive the rights of the families of individuals who get COVID and either die or are seriously injured from suing the NHS in the traditional way if they feel they haven’t been properly protected, particularly in the absence, they might feel appropriate PPE, there’s no waiving of their standard employment rights involved in any of this?"
"681","Matt Hancock: (24:31);No. Beth Rigby from SKY."
"682","Beth Rigby: (24:36);Thank you. Professor Whitty, at the beginning of the lockdown. Sir Patrick suggested a death toll below 20,000 was a good outcome. Now hospital deaths are suddenly above 21,000, and that doesn’t even include care home or community deaths. How have you had to change your expectations as the disease has progressed? And can you provide an updated expectation of what you think a more realistic number is now? And Secretary of State, you’ve promised a hundred thousand tests by Thursday and last week you said trace and track was key to ease in social distancing measures. What level of testing do you need to get track and trace up and running and what’s your timeframe for that?"
"683","Matt Hancock: (25:24);Yeah, go ahead."
"684","Chris Whitty: (25:27);So on the first one, the number will definitely see 20,000. So even with hospital deaths, as you say, sadly it has gone above that. Once we look into direct and indirect and I constantly make this point, it is really important direct and indirect deaths all cause mortality. We definitely sadly do expect it to exceed that."
"685","Chris Whitty: (25:51);I think that my view actually is we need to view this epidemic over the long run. And this has got a very long way to run. And I’m really cautious about putting out, and I’ve said this again repeatedly, these kinds of absolute numbers because this could go in a lot of different ways over the next many months until such time as we have a clear exit that has a vaccine or drugs or some other route that allows us to be able to say, “Look, we now couldn’t stop people dying from this.” And this is going to be true, to be clear, in every country around the world. So I’m really cautious about putting these absolute numbers, but I am absolutely clear also that the 20,000 number is not where we will be once we add in the direct and indirect causes both in and out of hospital."
"686","Matt Hancock: (26:39);And on the question on test, track and trace, it’s all a matter of degree and the lower the number of new cases, the more effective a system of test, track and trace of any scale is. And therefore a hundred thousand tests a day is a big enough testing system to start test, track and trace. But if it’s bigger, then the system can work on a higher number of cases and be more effective. South Korea is a really good example where they peaked in terms of tests today just over 20,000 and they’ve now brought that down because their number of new cases is so much lower. They can test everywhere they want and they still don’t need to use up all of the tests that they have the capacity for."
"687","Matt Hancock: (27:31);And we’ve seen over the last few weeks that the gaps between capacity and the number of tests done in this country as well, and on Sunday the new German Ambassador to the UK was explaining that the test capacity in Germany is 800,000 a week. And they used 450,000 of that capacity each week. So we have a similar pattern of the capacity being higher than tests use all around the world. And the capacity that we’re building is big enough to get started on test, track and trace."
"688","Matt Hancock: (28:12);We need to get the track and the trace part of that up and running so that they can be effective as we bring the number of new cases down."
"689","Beth Rigby: (28:25);Can I just follow up just on one thing. Professor Whitty, what explains the mismatch between where you thought the death toll would be at the beginning of the lockdown and where we are ending up a month in? What changed over the course of the past few weeks?"
"690","Chris Whitty: (28:43);I’ve never put an absolute number into the public domain. I’ve been asked this lots of times. My aim has always been to try and get the number to be the minimum we can manage, but to be clear this has got a very long way to run. And I think just thinking about the first peak, which due to the fantastic work the whole nation has done and the work of the NHS, we have actually managed to go through, we still got some way before it’s falling right off, but there is a long, long way to go beyond that. And I think it’s a big mistake in my view just to consider just the first phase. We need to look at the epidemic as a whole."
"691","Matt Hancock: (29:18);Thanks very much, Beth. Gary Gibbon from Channel 4."
"692","Gary Gibbon: (29:23);Professor Whitty, can I follow up on what Robert Peston was asking about on the infection rates? If we’re in the middle of the 0.5 to one range, will that do? Is that good enough, or is it actually the rate that you need to get clearance to a relaxation of the rules is lower than that, is perhaps around 0.5?"
"693","Chris Whitty: (29:49);Well, clearly the lower the R just to remind people who don’t watch this program the whole time. This is if R is one, one person gives it to one person and the disease is stable, if R is 0.5, 10 people give it to five and so on, it’s going down and if it’s two, one person gives it to two give it to four and so on. That was just a clarification for people watching. The further away the R is from one and on the downside, so the closer it is, the lower it is the better, for two reasons. The first of which is that it will mean that the peak will fall away faster and we’ll get down to small numbers at a quicker rate. That’s a good thing, clearly."
"694","Chris Whitty: (30:33);But the second thing is the larger the gap between where the R is, the current force of the transmission and one, the greater room for maneuverabilities in terms of trying to think through when ministers have to look at things in terms of what could be reintroduced without threatening the risk that we could go back above one and start going back to exponential growth."
"695","Chris Whitty: (30:55);So we know what we’ve currently measured indirectly, but I think that there’s a reasonable degree of confidence that it’s in that broader range 0.5 to one and I think it’s probably in a rather narrower range in the middle of that. Obviously if it was lower that would give us more room for maneuver, but it gives some room for maneuver, but it doesn’t give a huge amount of room for maneuver. And that’s one of the things that we ministers are going to have to consider is how to actually make sure we keep the R below one given where we are at the moment, thanks to what everybody is doing. But you know there isn’t a magic number here. Lower is better, but it’s not that there is a specific number that has to be the right number."
"696","Gary Gibbon: (31:33);May I ask a quick second? What’s your current estimate of what R naught is measuring in hospitals and care homes?"
"697","Chris Whitty: (31:42);I think at the moment it’s quite difficult to separate those two out. It is very clear it is falling in hospitals. Where it is in terms of care homes I think is less easy to work out at this point. We’ve got ONS data coming out tomorrow, which may help a bit, but we’re not measuring that directly, I have to say and-"
"698","Chris Whitty: (32:03);Which may help a bit, but we’re not measuring that directly I have to say. And what I think we’re seeing across the country is some care homes, weather significant outbreaks and other care homes which are unaffected, it’s not like the community are, which is much more heavily influenced by the whole of the population. It’s much more local to particular areas and particular care homes."
"699","Matt Hancock: (32:22);And maybe Steve could answer on the NHS point."
"700","Speaker 4: (32:24);Yeah, so in hospitals it’s clear that the number of people who are tasting positive in hospitals is falling and therefore infection rates are falling. We would expect that because we’re now in a position where the community spread of the virus is less and therefore that will translate into lower spread in people coming into hospital and therefore in hospitals as well. As Chris said, I think care homes think differently in terms of approach to that, but in hospitals it’s clear that the infection rate is falling."
"701","Matt Hancock: (32:55);Thanks very much Garry. Sebastian Payne of the FT."
"702","Sebastian Payne: (33:00);Thank you very much Mr. Hancock. There were reports over the weekend that in the second phase of fighting the coronavirus the government is planning to quarantine people arriving in the UK for 14 days. I was wondering what changed your mind about tighter border restrictions and does that mean you’re going to be encouraging British families to holiday at home this year? And if I can ask a question for professor Witty, could you give us an update on antibody testing please and whether the government has seen any breakthrough in its assessments for those tests?"
"703","Matt Hancock: (33:30);Thanks so much. On the borders, we’ve been very clear that we follow the science and given the current level of infections, level of new cases in the UK and the very low amounts of international travel that’s going on right now, it is clear that the impact on the epidemic as a whole of the number of people coming through the borders as a proportion is very low. But as we bring the number of new cases down in the UK, that proportion coming from those who are traveling internationally will rise and that means that the judgment on the measures that you need at the border changes. And we’ve seen a number of countries go through this process and we’ll have more to say about it in due course."
"704","Matt Hancock: (34:26);On the testing point I don’t know whether you want to go into that? But the antibody tests is still something that we work on. We have now lab based antibody tests in fact in the field now the office for national statistics survey is based on lab based antibody tests. But we’re yet to find what’s called a lateral flow, which means a test you can take, you don’t need to send a sample to a lab because it gives you the result on the stick. We’re yet to find one that has a clinical level of results that we’re confident in."
"705","Chris Whitty: (35:06);I mean, my view is it sounds very seldom moves forward by breakthroughs. It moves forward by small incremental changes that over time significantly improve things. That is what I think will happen with this antibody test. We currently have tests that are good enough to give us a first pass at arranging shot on surveys to give us a feel for how many people in the community overall may have been infected. Some of them without knowing it because there’s certainly some transmission without people actually getting symptoms. But an antibody test that is good enough actually to be able to say to an individual we’re confident either yes you’ve had it or we’re confident no you have not, we have not yet got to that stage and I think it’s unlikely to happen in a single leap. It’s likely to happen in a series of small improvements that get us to a point where we feel sufficient confidence we can do that."
"706","Sebastian Payne: (35:56);Thank you. Mr. Hancock, could I just ask a follow up please?"
"707","Matt Hancock: (35:58);Sure."
"708","Sebastian Payne: (35:59);You mentioned earlier you were encouraging people that if they’ve got heart pains or worried about serious illness to go to hospital. Has the government done any work to measure some of the health side effects of the lockdowns such as its impact on mental health or domestic violence and will that play any part in your decision on how to ease the lockdown measures? Thank you."
"709","Matt Hancock: (36:20);Yes we have and one of the striking things around the world is that far fewer people are coming forward to use health services including here far fewer people are coming forward to use non-covid services in the NHS. I’ll ask professor Powers to elaborate because he’s been doing a lot of the work on this."
"710","Speaker 4: (36:46);Yes. So secretary of state said and as Chris said earlier, one of the things that we have concerns around are the indirect deaths I.e Deaths at home that is not related specifically to infection with COVID-19. And that’s why for some weeks now we’ve all been reminding everybody that if you do have a condition which might be a heart attack, chest pain, symptoms that might be a stroke, then don’t forget that the NHS is still there for you. The emergency services are there and always have been there throughout this. And also these are conditions where it’s important not to wait because treatment and diagnosis and treatment speed is of the essence and we can do many things for those conditions now, but we need to do it quickly. So the message to the public is come forward, the NHS is working if you have a sick child, if you have those symptoms. I think in the longterm we will only be able to tease this out as we start to look at excess deaths overall."
"711","Speaker 4: (37:47);Chris has mentioned that I think earlier today and of course comparisons between countries in terms of excess deaths will be important as well. But we do know that attendance [inaudible 00:37:57] departments are done. There’s reasons that that might be the case, but there are reasons why we want to encourage people to come forward if they have emergency symptoms that might need emergency treatment. So I think it will become clearer over time. But the key message for the public is the NHS is there for you come forward as you always would if you’ve got symptoms or one of your loved ones has got symptoms that might need emergency treatment."
"712","Matt Hancock: (38:26);Thanks very much. So Gordon Rayner from The Telegraph."
"713","Gordon Rayner: (38:31);Thank you secretary of state. Professor Witty, you said in March that children only got mild symptoms of coronavirus, which you said was a silver lining. While Sir Patrick [inaudible 00:38:43] said closing schools would have a minimal effect on the spread of the virus so it was safe to keep them open and there was zero chance of children avoiding contact with each other anyway. To what extent has your advice on sending children to school changed? Have you worked out the effect on the R value of sending children back to school? And also do you believe that children can spread coronavirus to other children following reports at the weekend that perhaps they couldn’t and just very quickly, secretary of state, you’ve just announced good news for a lot of people that hospitals are going to start taking in cancer patients and doing other non-emergency work. Can you give us more detail on that and would people be watching this be wrong to interpret that as the start of an easing of the lockdown?"
"714","Matt Hancock: (39:27);Great, do you want to take the first one and then I’ll ask Steve to comment on it."
"715","Chris Whitty: (39:32);So it remains the case that the great majority of children either don’t get coronavirus or if they do the symptoms are minor. That doesn’t mean sadly that that is absolutely true. There are still a small number of cases including some very severe cases, but they are relative to adults they’re much less than adults. So that remains absolutely the case. So the first reason for not sending children to school, which is it’s particularly dangerous for them, that wouldn’t be true in the case of coronavirus. Secondly, there is no doubt that they contribute. If you have schools open, it does contribute to increasing the R, so if you close schools the R goes down. It’s part of the collection of things that were done in March to try and pull the R from where it was near three to where it is now below one."
"716","Chris Whitty: (40:28);It’s only one off, if you did it just on its own, it wouldn’t be enough. But if you stopped doing it, you would actually lose some of the benefits that we’ve currently got. Now, there is quite a debate at the moment around the world in science what contribution do children make to the actual spread of this virus between families around the country, wherever we’re talking about. And is it different, for example, between young children and older children? Which it may be. But unfortunately we do not yet have direct data that really helps us remembering that this is a new disease so we can give a reasonably accurate answer for disease like flu. We really understand how children help drive flu. We’re still really learning on this one. And so whilst I think it remains the case that we think that the contribution of children at school to the spread of this virus is probably less than, for example, for flu."
"717","Chris Whitty: (41:25);We do think it certainly contributes and what we’re trying to work out is what proportion of the R it contributes and therefore if children went back to school how much closer to one and that’s in a bad way, would we be? And could it even tip us above one and what can we do if so to try and minimize that? So it’s a very good question to which there is unfortunately not a really clear answer. But we are getting closer I think to having a slightly narrower range of uncertainty around this."
"718","Matt Hancock: (41:55);Thanks Chris. On the restoration of the NHS, we’ve always said throughout that people should come forward for medical treatment. So people’s access to the NHS, access to medical treatment has never been locked down. Indeed it’s one of the four reasons that you should leave your house if you need to. And what we can do though is because we now have the capacity in the NHS to be able to start reopening some services we can do that. And I’ll ask Steve to answer the question about with more detail, but it will be locally determined according to what capacity there is locally. But our message to people watching this and reading the Daily Telegraph is that the NHS is open and there to help you as it always is. And so people, if they think they need medical treatment from the NHS, then they should come forward in the first instance by phoning up their GP or going to their GP online calling one on one."
"719","Speaker 4: (43:02);Yeah so as the secretary of state says we are now in a position to start undertaking some of the services that we may have had to have stepped down to manage the surging coronaviruses or occasionally where services have become disrupted. So for instance, I know cancer patients there may be good clinical reasons why treatment might be delayed during a time when there is a lot of circulating virus in the community. And again as we’ve both said, emergency services have been there all along and it’s really important that people access them. But I think to answer your question directly, it’s not at all a sign that the lockdown is about to be relaxed. In fact, I think it’s the reverse. It’s a sign that the lockdown and the measures that have been taken and the fact that everybody’s following them has meant that we are now seeing a decline in patients in hospital with COVID-19 and it’s exactly that that is providing the capacity once again, that means that we can get back to restarting services such as elective surgery."
"720","Speaker 4: (44:09);So I think the message shouldn’t be now is the time to relax. The message should be that by continuing to comply with these instructions, it will continue to help the NHS as we start to get over the peak and the plateaus to a point where we can get much more back to the services that unfortunately we’ve had to delay over the last few weeks as we’ve managed this surge."
"721","Gordon Rayner: (44:33);And can I just ask you a quick follow up?"
"722","Matt Hancock: (44:34);Of course yeah."
"723","Gordon Rayner: (44:36);Just on the school’s question, I mean listening to that answer that professor Witty gave a lot of people I think listening to this would interpret that as being in that there still isn’t really a plan in place for how schools are going to go back. Would it be wrong to infer that from what you’re saying?"
"724","Matt Hancock: (44:55);Well Chris, what I’d say it’s still as we’ve said over and over again too early to make decisions on this and people should follow the social distancing rules of staying at home to protect the NHS and save lives. And in a way, what we’ve been saying today about the restarting of hospital treatments, NHS treatments and the encouragement of many people to come forward when they haven’t been coming forward with non-covid health problems is all part of protecting the NHS, which has been made possible by the fact that we’ve flattened the curve thanks to the social distancing measures. So it should be seen in that light, in that context. But on the school specifically Chris, do you want to answer?"
"725","Chris Whitty: (45:47);So I think starting with the obvious point that obviously the final decisions will be for ministers and this is not a scientific decision. But what we can contribute from the science side is to say well look we’ve got this room for maneuver between where the R is now and one. And there’s a lot of things to contributing which everyone’s doing to pulling that down. Schools are contributing some of that and it may be different between different bits of schools and what we’re trying to do in very, very short order is try and give a kind of feel for what are the combinations of different things which actually still keep the R below one, which is an absolutely critical thing but allow opening up different bits of society and different bits of which schools is one."
"726","Chris Whitty: (46:35);But I think the decision about how the different combinations go together, that finally is one for ministers. And I know the secretary of state would completely agree with that. What we can do is help provide some data to help say, here are some combinations of things we can do. But, and I really want to be clear about this, there is no perfect solution where we are going to end up being able to do all the things that people want and at the same time keep R below one. So there are going to have to be some very difficult choices between different things, all of which ideally all of us would love to open up, but we can’t do them all. And therefore there will have to be some difficult choices and choices around schools clearly will be one of those."
"727","Matt Hancock: (47:15);Is that okay, Gordon?"
"728","Gordon Rayner: (47:17);Yes thank you."
"729","Matt Hancock: (47:19);Great. We’ve got David Walsh from the Sheffield Star"
"730","David Walsh: (47:23);Hello secretary of state. The raise the bar campaign wants to increase the threshold over 25,000 pounds retail hospitality unless you’re a grant from 51,000 pounds reasonable value, to 150,000. In Sheffield city center this would mean a further 157 businesses can benefit from additional 3.9 million pounds of support. This could save businesses and jobs unless [inaudible 00:47:55]. A second one for the secretary of state please, Sheffield is famous for its independent breweries…"
"731","David: (48:02);Sheffield is famous for its independent breweries. It has more per capita than anywhere in the country and was enjoying a golden age prior to the crisis. The government’s supporting them in time, but with no opening date yet for pubs and bars, their very existence is under threat. To get them back on their feet, will the government council [inaudible 00:48:22] the six months when they’re allowed to restart operations."
"732","Matt Hancock: (48:28);Well, thanks David. I understand, especially coming from a small business background myself, just how important these questions are to the businesses in the Central Sheffield and the breweries, which have, as you say, been flourishing right across the country over the past few years and have obviously been very hard hit by social distancing, by its nature, which takes away the ability to go for a pint with friends. So I will take these away and talk to the chancellor about them. What I would say is his announcement today of 100% guaranteed loans for smaller businesses is another important step in supporting businesses to get through this. We recognize the importance of supporting businesses right across the board, whether they’re in the town center breweries or others who are badly hit by this. Supporting businesses through it is critical because both the health impact of the measures and the economic impact are both best served by people staying at home because that saves lives but will also get the rate of transmission down as fast as possible, which will then allow us to get through this as soon as possible."
"733","Matt Hancock: (49:56);So we want to get through it as soon as possible and we want to support businesses on the way through and those two specific ideas, it’s tempting to say yes to as health secretary, but I think that I need to talk to the chancellor. Thanks very much. Dave West from the HSJ."
"734","Dave West: (50:17);Hi. Thank you. First question for Mr. Hancock. Could you tell us a bit more about the restoration of general planned services in the NHS? And there are millions people on the waiting list for general operations or appointments, hip replacements or cataracts and things. What sort of timeframe would you expect that kind of general activity to be getting back to normal? Might it be region by region and what role do those Nightingale hospitals have to play in that which you mentioned? And second question if I can for Chris or Steven. This morning, HSJ revealed the warning to doctors about the small numbers of children who are becoming seriously ill with an unusual set of symptoms which the experts believe may be an emerging symptom linked to coronavirus. Do you think this may be a new feature of the outbreak or are you pretty confident that these are simply cases of the very small number of serious cases of coronavirus which we do see in children?"
"735","Matt Hancock: (51:20);Thank you. I’m very worried about the latter and we are looking into it closely. I’ll ask Steve to answer on that. On the restoration, this will be a locally driven approach system by system. Of course the principles are that the most urgent treatment should be brought back first and also that it needs to be according to the local demands on the system. There’s parts of the country where their number of COVID patients as a proportion is much lower than in other parts. And so it has to be locally driven. Unfortunately, I can’t give you a sort of concrete single number answer to when and it is gradually over weeks but starting from tomorrow. Steve?"
"736","Steve: (52:10);Yes, thanks Dave. Yeah, so as you’ve referred to, we have become aware in the last few days of reports of severe illness in children, which might be a Kawasaki like disease. So Kawasaki diseases is a very rare inflammatory condition that occurs in children. The cause is not often known, can be related to a number of things. So it’s only in the last few days as I say that we’ve seen those reports and I know you reported that in the Health Service Journal this morning. So both Chris and I are aware of that. We have asked our experts, I’ve asked the National Clinical Director for Children, Young People to look into this as a matter of urgency. I know the secretary of state is concerned as he said, I know public health England, they’re also looking into this."
"737","Steve: (52:55);So it’s obviously important that when clinicians see these cases and worry that there might be a cluster, they alert other clinicians so that we can make sure that they are identified if they’re occurring elsewhere and then quite rightly, we ask our experts to look into them and to see whether they can establish any link."
"738","Steve: (53:16);We’re not sure at the moment. It’s really too early to say whether there is a link, but what I should say as we said already this afternoon is our advice to parents is that these are the sort of diseases, very, very rare. If you are worried about a child who is becoming sick and not recovering, then do remember to contact 111, talk to GP or an emergency contact 999 because the emergency services in the NHS are there for sick children and it’s important for this and other conditions. Although very rare, I must emphasize rare, that you come forward to seek treatment and diagnosis as quickly as possible."
"739","Matt Hancock: (53:55);Thanks Steve. Chris Whitty."
"740","Chris Whitty: (53:57);Just really to reinforce what Steve said, this is a very rare situation but I think it is entirely plausible that this is caused by this virus at least in some cases because we know that in adults who of course have much more disease than children do, the big problems are caused by an inflammatory process and this looks rather like an inflammatory process, a rather different one, but therefore given that we’ve got a new presentation of this at a time with a new disease, the possibility, it’s not definite, we need to look for other causes as well. But the possibility that there is a link is certainly plausible. But back to Steve’s overriding point, numbers are very small. Key thing is if parents are worried then phone up and get advice. Very rare."
"741","Speaker 6: (54:40);Ask a very quick follow up on the restoration."
"742","Matt Hancock: (54:42);Yes."
"743","Speaker 6: (54:44);The NHS needed to free up about 30,000 beds to ensure it was ready to deal with the first peak and has been able to do so but has he used a lot of capacity and that’s rearranged a lot of things. How many is it going to need to keep open in case of a second peak or other returns of the virus because that’s clearly going to be a big constraining factor along with the staff who staff the beds on what it can get through back to normal."
"744","Matt Hancock: (55:09);Well, one of the principles of the tests we’ve sat before we make any adjustments to the social distancing measures is that we shouldn’t risk a second peak for many, many reasons. The direct impact of course, but also because a second peak would mean that we would have to halt the restoration of the NHS for non COVID treatments and that has an impact itself on the health of the nation as Chris Whitty first set out several weeks ago in terms of the indirect death rate. So we’ve got to make sure that we don’t have that second peak. Therefore, the NHS is of course making sure that it can reopen where that locally is appropriate given the local amount of pressure on the system and also take into account the Nightingale hospitals."
"745","Matt Hancock: (56:08);In fact, I’m going to answer a question that was asked previously by Beth Rigby I think, but I didn’t answer, which is that the Nightingale’s are not going to be used for non coronavirus purposes because they are precisely set up and designed to deal with people who are intubated and are sedated. But the fact that they’re there does help us to restore more of the core NHS and get that going as much as possible. Were you coming in again?"
"746","Speaker 6: (56:46);I was just going to say very funnily would you see them all the Nightingale hospitals, all seven or I think it’s seven or eight now to be used in that way?"
"747","Matt Hancock: (56:55);In the first instance, yes, but as we go through this we always keep things like this open to review to work out what’s the best way to use the resources at the nation’s disposal. Steve."
"748","Steve: (57:08);Yeah, so I think the Nightingale’s in specifically have been a very important part of the flexibility that the NHS has put in place to manage the surge. Remember, it’s only a few weeks ago that we were really concerned that we would see a surge in patients, particularly those that needed critical care that would go beyond even the surge capacity we could put in place in our existing critical care facilities by surging into theaters and recovery areas. So the Nightingale’s I think are real proof that the NHS can be agile and flexible and can change its model of care in a very short period of time. Clearly, we want to keep them there because although the peak is reducing, we still feel that we need to have them there as the insurance policy for COVID patients."
"749","Steve: (57:55);But as we go forward, we will be keeping them under review as the secretary of state has said and of course we’re only into the first week or so of coming off a plateau and a peak. And as you would expect all that work, again, as the secretary of state has indicated is being done at the moment to plan capacity going forward. And the restoration of services is a really important part of that, which I’m absolutely sure will occur hospital by hospital and region by region because infection rates are a bit different everywhere and because different organizations have stacked up to manage the surge in slightly different ways. But the key point is that we are now in a position to bring those services increasingly back on stream."
"750","Matt Hancock: (58:38);If you’d asked me a month ago, Dave, whether we would be having this discussion now about the restoration of those parts of the NHS that we had to pause in order to put capacity towards treating coronavirus. And the question is, how much NHS capacity do we need to keep in hand in case there’s a second outbreak, which we don’t want to risk. And that the NHS had not in the meantime, been at all overtopped by demand in any instance, then I think we’d be … If you told me that a month ago, I would be very pleased with where we’ve come to on the NHS capacity because that is absolutely core to the principles of this country is that if you need NHS treatment, then you get it. And we’ve managed to keep that principle throughout this vast crisis. Okay. Thank you very much indeed. That concludes our Downing street briefing for today."
"751","Ruth May: (00:00);And we feel their loss deeply. I’d like to offer my sincere condolences to the family, the friends, and the colleagues of every member of NHS staff who have died in the recent weeks. Every single person in this country can help our nurses and our NHS staff. You can keep yourselves and others safe and out of our hospitals by staying home. We freed up more than 30,000 beds, the equivalent of 50 just at general hospitals in the past few weeks, and that’s before opening the extraordinary NHS Nightingale Hospital in East London. I’m pleased to announce today that alongside the new hospitals in Birmingham, Manchester, Howard Gates, and Bristol, I can confirm that Sunderland and Exeter will soon see Nightingale Hospitals in their communities too."
"752","Ruth May: (00:58);These extra hospitals, if we need them, will be part of the NHS’s nationwide response to coronavirus. The greatest healthcare challenge the NHS has ever faced. And I’m proud that continuing the tradition dating back to the founding of our NHS 72 years ago, nurses are at the heartbeat of this people’s health service."
"753","Ruth May: (01:24);These are difficult days, but amid this dark news that each day brings, my colleagues are sustained by the extraordinary shows of support for the NHS has been received from our public. The rainbows, the NHS signs in the window lift me and they lift my colleagues. I’d never thought to see people across this country clapping and showing your thanks every Thursday. It means a great deal to me and my colleagues more than I can say. But there is one thing, there is no doubt that the single greatest thing you can do to say thank you to our NHS and social care staff is for people to follow the advice. This is a long weekend. We need you to stay at home and stay safe. Thank you."
"754","Matt Hancock: (02:21);I’ll now ask a Professor Van-Tam to take us through the slides and the data that we publish every day."
"755","Jonathan Van-Tam: (02:29);Thank you, Secretary of State. May I have the next slide, please? Okay, so you’ll recall that one week ago I presented some data to you on transport use and how that had changed over time as the public had followed our social distancing advice. I’m pleased to report to you today, you can see on the slide that in the week that has passed since I last stood at this podium, the trend has continued that use of various forms of public transport have all stayed at low levels. I can’t tell you how important it is that you just keep going with this. This is not over. When I move onto the next slide, you’ll see it’s not over. We have to keep pushing as a nation to maintain our social distancing. We have to take the pain now to make the gain in a few weeks time. Next slide, please."
"756","Jonathan Van-Tam: (03:35);So this is a slide which shows you from the 16th of March on the left through to the 10th of April on the right, new UK cases. And these are based on the day on which the laboratory test was completed. So of course there is a little variation there between when the test was taken and the test was completed, but nevertheless you can easily see the broad trend that we have been in an increased phase and now we are at a point where we’re at a high level. The numbers are varying day by day, but they’re at this high level. We are in a dangerous phase still and I need to reinforce that again to you that this is not over. Next slide, please."
"757","Jonathan Van-Tam: (04:28);If you look at people diagnosed with COVID-19 who are now occupying hospital beds in Great Britain, you can see that again over the period of the slide from 20th of March through to the 9th of April, there has been a steady increase. But possibly, you can see that the curve is bending. It’s impossible to say that we have peaked. London has gone down in the last day, but the Northeast and Yorkshire have gone up. However, I suggest to you that the curve is beginning to bend and that your hard work is beginning to pay off. But again, I say this is just not over. It needs to continue. Next slide, please."
"758","Jonathan Van-Tam: (05:18);If you look at critical care, the slide talks for itself of the extent to which London has been the epicenter of our wave, our first wave. You can see that the other parts of Britain are at a lower level, but the trend overall is pretty much the same that there has been the sharp increase. There may be some signs that the curve is beginning to bend, but it’s premature absolutely to say that we’re at a peak and the push that we’re making with social distancing just has to continue."
"759","Jonathan Van-Tam: (05:57);I would add a personal touch here and say that my mother-in-law is a healthcare assistant. Two of my best friends, one is a nurse, another one is an operating department professional who’s been repurposed to high dependency to work on this crisis. This really matters and it really matters that we keep going with it. Next slide, please."
"760","Jonathan Van-Tam: (06:28);If you look at the global death comparison on this slide again, as last week, these are synchronized so that day naught is the day at which each country reported 50 deaths. And you can see that again, there is this broad similar trajectory across many countries that report data with one or two outliers. The UK continues to be broadly in line with what is happening in other countries. It’s still a dangerous situation. We have to keep taking measures to bring this under control. Thank you, Secretary of State."
"761","Matt Hancock: (07:07);Thank you very much. So if we now go to questions. The first question we’ve got is from Hugh Pym at the BBC."
"762","Hugh Pym: (07:16);Thank you very much. Secretary of State, you and other ministers have said repeatedly in recent weeks that you have plans to get protective equipment to the NHS and social care. Health and care workers are saying to us they are still struggling in some cases to get that equipment. They feel unsafe. Aren’t you now acknowledging that previous plans were just not enough, were not sufficient?"
"763","Matt Hancock: (07:39);Thanks. What I’m acknowledging is that this is an enormous challenge, a Herculean logistical effort. We’ve so far delivered 742 million pieces of protective equipment. But it is a task that needs a constant effort because of the 1.4 million people who work in the NHS and the over 2 million people who work in social care using PPE has gone from being something that happens in a relatively small way to right across the board. And the critical thing is that people use PPE like the precious resource that it is and that we get the PPE to them so that they can always have what is clinically needed."
"764","Matt Hancock: (08:29);Now, of course, I listened to the concerns that are raised with me and what I can tell you is that the team who are trying to deliver on this have themselves put in an enormous effort. We are getting the PPE out there, but there’s clearly a huge task ahead to keep it flowing and to make that those who need it get it. I don’t know if Ruth wants to say anything in terms of a report from the front line as a nurse herself."
"765","Ruth May: (09:07);Absolutely. So I know as a nurse that PPE is very important for their safety but also the feeling of being safe. I know that I also want to make sure that people are using it and they’re wearing it to the right level and the right environment. And that’s really important. But I also know and I hear that it’s a challenge, it’s a struggle right now to making sure we’ve got it everywhere we needed at the right time. That is what the Secretary of State has already set out in his strategy is being launched today, but making sure that the government is doing just that. And collectively, we’re wanting to do it. But it’s really important we’re doing that."
"766","Ruth May: (09:47);I know also I was yesterday, at the London XL Nightingale Hospital receiving my refresher training about how to put my PPE on and off and it’s a challenge. It’s tough wearing PPE. So I want to also recognize that for all of our staff right now."
"767","Matt Hancock: (10:06);Thanks very much. [Sejal Maria 00:10:07] from ITV."
"768","Hugh Pym: (10:10);Can I come back?"
"769","Matt Hancock: (10:11);Sure. Yes, Hugh. Sorry. We’ll go back to Hugh and come back to you Sejal."
"770","Hugh Pym: (10:15);Yeah. Just very quickly. I mean you’ve published plans before and given reassurances about protective equipment. There will be a lot of skepticism won’t there still about another plan being published. I mean what guarantees can you give that people will be made to feel safe with the right equipment?"
"771","Matt Hancock: (10:33);Yes. Well, we have made progress on PPE throughout this. I think what you might be referring to in terms of published, what we published before, was last week making sure that we brought clarity to what PPE is needed in what settings. This plan is about that, but it’s also about how we then deliver with details of how the supply chain works and also crucially how British manufacturers can step forward and deliver to specifications that we’ve published the technical details of so that manufacturers can come forward to replenish the stocks that we’ve got. What I’d say is that it is a constant effort to get the PPE to the front line. A huge logistical effort."
"772","Matt Hancock: (11:19);We acknowledged the challenges, of course we do. We face them every day and we are doing everything in our power to get that PPE to the frontline. And those with concerns about PPE at the frontline, we’re making sure that they have a place that they can go in order to call for help. So it’s a detailed plan set out in public both so that we can encourage more suppliers to come and replenish the stockpile, but also so that everybody can see the challenges that there are and how we’re proposing to overcome them. If we go to Sejal Maria now, ITV."
"773","Sejal Maria: (12:02);Thank you, Secretary of State. It’s good news that the Prime Minister’s health is improving. Does he accept though that he is unlikely to be able to return to work soon? And is the government ready to take key decisions such as whether the lockdown will be extended in his absence? Given the Republic of Ireland just announced their lockdown will continue until the 5th of May, shouldn’t you level with everyone that we are heading for a much longer than a three-week lockdown too?"
"774","Matt Hancock: (12:35);Well, the Prime Minister is recovering and I’m sure the whole nation is delighted to see the news that he’s getting better. The fact that he was so ill demonstrates once again just how serious this disease is. I’m delighted about that. The good news is that the government in his absence has been functioning very efficiently, very-"
"775","Matt Hancock: (13:03);… effectively. The foreign secretary yesterday made clear that we don’t have enough information yet to be able to make any changes to the social distancing arrangements and that Sage will meet next week and they will look at the data then. And the way that we make that decision has been set out very clearly and is functioning very well. I think the foreign secretary is doing an excellent job in chairing the committee of that that makes these decisions in the prime minister’s absence. But that is within the context of a strategy that the prime minister very clearly set out and that we’re working through and we’re able to get on with the day to day things like publishing today’s PPE plan and do the things that are needed whilst the prime minister recovers. Thanks very much. Ben Kentish from LBC."
"776","Ben Kentish: (14:05);Thank you health secretary. Many people around the country, many LBC listeners they’re asking why the UK is continuing to allow people to enter the country from virus hotspots and planes to land without the people on those planes even being tested or asked to quarantine. Isn’t that a real risk that once we do pass the peak, all the efforts that we’ve made to reduce the number of cases risk being undermined by people continuing to enter the country unchecked from other countries where the number of cases is still much higher? And what measures will you put in place to stop that? And if I could just ask professor Van Tam, health secretary said there that staying behind your front door is better than any face mask but other countries are not seeing it of course as an either or Germany this week becoming the latest to say that the face mask would be a key part of their exit strategy, a key part of their plan to tackle this virus."
"777","Ben Kentish: (14:56);The UK risk becoming a bit of an outlier here because the government’s position is that there’s no real benefit to those asks. Can I just ask what evidence our decision has been based on and why you think other countries have taken such a different approach if the science does say that masks aren’t particularly effective? Thank you."
"778","Matt Hancock: (15:14);The answer to both questions Ben is the same, which is that we follow the science and we’ve followed the science in terms of international travel all along. And we saw right at the start of this pandemic that the country that the two countries that brought in the most draconian international travel restrictions, the United States and Italy, both of them have now got serious problems themselves. So I think that the science which said that which we followed on international travel has been born out by events."
"779","Matt Hancock: (15:52);On the second question as well, I’ll hand over to professor Van Tam but I just want to absolutely underline the same point, which is that we follow the science. And the science on the use of face masks says that they don’t have a material impact outside of those settings which the Public Health England have set out. But also here we are following the international evidence too, the world health organization have themselves looked into this very recently and came to the conclusion that face masks should be saved for those in health and care who really need them. So it is not a risk free option for everybody to wear face masks because that means that it’s harder to get hold of face masks for the people where the science says that they are needed. Professor."
"780","Jonathan Van-Tam: (16:47);Thank you secretary state. Thank you Ben. To your first point about closing borders, our scientists have been very clear from the outset that that would not work as a measure to prevent the ingress of coronavirus into the UK. Coronavirus is now in the UK and transmitting very widely. I understand the point you’re making and I see where you’re coming from in terms of when we get this under control doesn’t that change the situation? But we won’t go from a position of widespread community transmission amongst our own people to a position of zero transmission amongst our own people, which of course was the case back in December, 2019. We will likely go back to low levels of transmission and the virus will continue to be here in and around us in our communities I suspect for a very long time even if we can keep the levels right down."
"781","Jonathan Van-Tam: (17:55);So from that perspective, I hope that adds a bit of sense to the context of the question around travel. Now in terms of face masks and general wearing of them by the public, I do know that this is a very vexed and very emotive issue with citizens all around the world frankly. And we have kept this under very careful and repetitive scientific review. Our expert advisory committee Nervtech met again this week to consider all of these matters and we do remain convinced that there just isn’t the evidence base to support general mask wearing use by the public. You’ve probably seen the paper that was released four days ago on bio XIV by Paul Hunter’s team from the university of East Anglia. They have been through all of that evidence again."
"782","Jonathan Van-Tam: (19:03);We have looked at all of that evidence in that paper again and it remains the case that we do not see at this point a persuasive argument for general mask wearing by the public. But I want to assure you personally and of course those who are listening in that we will keep the science evidence under review and we are going to be guided by the science and if the science evidence changes then we will change."
"783","Matt Hancock: (19:34);Thanks very much. Charlotte at talk radio."
"784","Charlotte: (19:39);Thank you Mr. Hancock. And could I firstly ask how many frontline NHS workers have died from COVID-19. And secondly can I ask when health care worker does pass away has there been some form of investigatory process put in place so that we can learn lessons from what happens to them and make sure it doesn’t happen again too their colleagues?"
"785","Matt Hancock: (20:01);Yes. I think this is a question for you Ruth."
"786","Ruth May: (20:05);Okay. Thank you very much. We know that any death due to coronavirus is a tragic one, we also know that a death of one of our workers, one of our family is for me heartbreaking. We do have a numbers of people that have died, whether they’re nurses, midwives, healthcare assistants, doctors. It would be inappropriate for me right now to go into listing them and numbering them because we haven’t got necessarily all of the position of crossing them with all of the people’s families given us the permission to talk about them. But I recognize that we will and will want to make sure that we are learning any lessons to be learned, but it’d be inappropriate for me to comment on any individual deaths that we’ve seen, whether that is one of our healthcare workers or not."
"787","Matt Hancock: (21:06);Thanks very much Charlotte. Anna Mikhailova from The Telegraph."
"788","Anna Mikhailova: (21:14);A question for the health secretary. Economists are on average predicting that there’s going to be a 14% drop in GDP in the second quarter of this year and understand some in government fear that it could be even worse. What would the impact of that be on the numbers of deaths that are not directly related to coronavirus?"
"789","Matt Hancock: (21:35);This is a really important question and one that I worry about a lot. The goal that I have as health secretary is to protect life, but you’ve got to make sure that you look at that in the widest context. Of course protecting people from deaths directly due to coronavirus that’s actually the subject in most of the discussions at these press conferences and a huge amount of effort to make sure that the NHS capacity is there. The second type of mortality that we protect against is deaths that occur because the NHS is overrun. And I’m very pleased that thus far in this crisis there is no point at which the NHS has been overrun and every single person with coronavirus has been able to access the best possible care in the NHS because we’ve taken the action to expand the NHS, source the ventilators and increased capacity with the Nightingale hospitals to make sure that there is always the capacity there and that is obviously absolutely top priority as we repeat at the start of each of these press conferences."
"790","Matt Hancock: (22:50);The third type of impact is the impact due to delaying NHS activity because we’re responding to coronavirus. Some of this you have to delay because for instance some treatments for cancer require you to take immunity down to very low levels, which is a dangerous thing to do when there’s a very significant virus around. And then the fourth impact on mortality that we consider is the economic impact. Now we do not yet have an established estimate of the impact of the huge problems in the economy that have been caused and that impact on itself back onto the health of the nation. But it’s a piece of work that I’m working on jointly with the chancellor to make sure that when we make decisions about the big policy decisions, especially around social distancing we take into account the entire impact on the health and wellbeing of everyone in the country. Not just on the highly visible impact on the deaths from coronavirus, but right across the board including indirectly through the economic impact of the crisis."
"791","Matt Hancock: (24:13);So it’s something that I, as a trained economist, I’m very alive to. I work very closely with Rishi on it and it’s something that will be at the heart of our judgments as we make the decisions in the future. But what’s clear is that right now it is too early to make those judgements and so the position as of this weekend and the most important message for everybody this weekend is to stay at home because that’s what saves lives. Did that answer the question?"
"792","Charlotte: (24:49);All right, well can I just quickly follow up, you say that work is ongoing I understand if it is too early to tell what exactly the economic impact will be, but it’s been reported today that there is existing government modeling of 150,000 deaths but could be unrelated to coronavirus, but because of all these other impacts that you’ve just listed does that sound plausible to you as a ballpark?"
"793","Matt Hancock: (25:12);No, I saw that figure in the Telegraph this morning, but it’s wrong. It’s not part of our internal analysis and when we do do that analysis and are in a position that we’ve got confidence in it, then I’m sure we’ll be able to answer the question more directly. But that 150,000 figure is not correct. Tom Newton down at The Sun."
"794","Tom Newton: (25:45);Thank you very much health secretary. Question to the chief nursing officer if I may first. When you’re out and about, you’re driving around you see people flagrantly disregarding social distancing mucking around in parks, there’ve been reports of hundreds of house parties being broken up by the police in Manchester."
"795","Tom Newton: (26:03);… reports of hundreds of house parties being broken up by the police in Manchester. How does that make you feel, personally, after the very emotive words you just said about your service and the colleagues you’ve lost? And a question to the Deputy CMO, if I might. Obviously, it’s too early to start talking about relaxing the lockdown restrictions because you don’t have the dataset, but when the time does come for that, in weeks in advance, maybe, what are the sort of numeric targets you would consider happy for case loads in hospitals, admissions, overall fatality rates, whatever it might be? What’s the level we have to get down to before you’re happy to advise the government that it’s now time to start thinking about relaxing them? Can you give the British people some sort of target they can look out for some time in the future?"
"796","Matt Hancock: (26:48);I’ll ask obviously, Ruth, to answer the first, and Professor Van-Tam to answer the second. But just before I do, I just want to correct something in the premise of the second question, which is that it’s not that we don’t yet have data, it’s the information that we do have so far shows that we’re not there yet. It’s because if you look at the curves, whilst they are flattening, they’re not flattening far enough to be able to make any changes, and that’s what SAGE will look at again next week. So just, it’s a important nuance in the way that the question was put, but I’ll ask JVT to answer, if you’re happy with that marginally reframed question. Ruth."
"797","Ruth May: (27:30);So Tom, it’s very, very frustrating. It’s personally frustrating to see people clearly not doing social distancing and clearly coming out in large groups. I was only on the way here going over Westminster Bridge, seeing a whole horde of cyclists coming together. It is enormously frustrating. The reason that it’s frustrating is because there’s also still occasions where my colleagues are getting abuse from their neighbors for driving off to work. So Sam, a nurse in a mental health organization in East of England, had grief from her neighbors because she was traveling to work. Our nurses, our healthcare staff need to be able to get to work. It’s right and proper they do. But my ask of everybody, please stay at home, save lives, and protect my staff."
"798","Matt Hancock: (28:23);Thanks very much. Professor."
"799","Jonathan Van-Tam: (28:25);Thank you Secretary of State. So Tom, thank you for the question. I completely understand that everyone wants a number or a figure or something that they can say, “Can I look out for this? Will that then begin to tell me that we’re finally beating this for real, for good.” In this wave, if you see what I mean. That advice, unfortunately, is complicated. It will come from SAGE, from the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, and it will be based upon looking at the number of tests that are positive that are coming through the system. It will be based upon the number of new hospital admissions with confirmed coronavirus. It will be based upon the number of people going to ICU and the number of deaths."
"800","Jonathan Van-Tam: (29:21);All of those indicators will need to be taken into account to give us a proper reliable picture that things are definitely on the downturn and that we feel constant confident that it is consistently now the case. And you’ve seen on the figures I’ve shown today with new cases, you know the figures are kind of bouncing around a bit, and that’s entirely normal. That is random variation that you get with any biological phenomenon, any disease phenomenon involving humans, and much as I’m itching to give you one thing you can go on, and say, “This is the signal that we’re looking for.” Then I just can’t. It is just too soon and it is a more complicated judgment than that based on a number of indicators."
"801","Matt Hancock: (30:21);Thank you very much. Does that satisfy you Tom?"
"802","Tom Newton: (30:26);Just a very, very quick follow up. I completely accept Mr. Van-Tam’s point. Can you in which case, just define what we mean, or what you mean, by, ‘the peak’ because obviously there’s weeks apart from hospital admissions in cases to fatalities. What exactly is the peak, and how do we know when the peak is past?"
"803","Jonathan Van-Tam: (30:43);Right, so in terms of the indicators I’ve given you, this whole concept is a bit like a hose pipe in your garden with a tap at one end and when you turn that tap off water still comes out the hose pipe for a few seconds before it dies down. So it is with the indicators here, there are people being infected with coronavirus today. They will develop their symptoms at some point over the next two weeks. Regrettably, some of them will become ill enough to go into hospital, possibly, about seven days after the onset of their symptoms, and then, not all of them will need intensive care, thankfully only a very small proportion, but they won’t all need intensive care the moment they’re admitted to hospital."
"804","Jonathan Van-Tam: (31:37);Some will perhaps take a few days before that happens and that’s a further delay. Then those that are unfortunately going to succumb to this disease don’t succumb instantly and again, that takes time for those deaths to show from infections that occurred maybe two weeks before that. So from that perspective, we work all the time with these lag periods and the peak of each of those indices will be different and you do need to have a composite understanding of all of them and to be thoroughly assured that this is now turning down for good in this wave before you can signal to the government that it’s time to think about what happens next on social distancing."
"805","Matt Hancock: (32:32);Okay, thanks Tom. Hannah Al-Othman from Buzzfeed. Hello."
"806","Hannah Al-Othman: (32:38);Hi, I’m Mr. Hancock. How exactly you’re going to get from 19,000 to a hundred thousand tests by the end of the month if two of the three mega labs that you set up won’t be up and running for another couple of weeks? And what will you do if you don’t? And a question that Jonathan Van-Tam. Doctors have told us that they’re being asked to ration oxygen, what are you doing to ensure not just that the oxygen tanks are full, but hospitals have the capacity to deliver those supplies to patients at the rates that they need?"
"807","Matt Hancock: (33:14);Thanks very much. I’ve set the clear goal of 100,000 tests a day by the end of the month, and I’m pleased that the number now is over a 19,000 a day. I was setting out how we’ve got four mega labs coming on stream. The first three of those already got going, it’s the Cambridge one little come on-stream at the end of this month, and we also have all of the existing labs within Public Health England and the NHS, and some other research institutes that we’re using. As I say, this is a part of a national effort and one of the things that’s happened since I announced the goal for the nation as a whole, and for the life sciences industry, of 100,000 tests a day by the end of the month, is we’ve had a huge number of offers of people who’ve come to us and said, “Well we can turn this facility, which hasn’t been a coronavirus testing facility, into a coronavirus testing facility,” and facilities that we didn’t know about or equipment that we didn’t know about that they brought to the task."
"808","Matt Hancock: (34:25);The other thing about the mega labs that we’re opening is that many of them are staffed by volunteers, and volunteers who are super specialist in exactly what we need, and meeting many of them yesterday, it was incredibly inspiring to see what they’re doing because they know that this is vital for the national effort and they’ve brought their skills to us to help everybody through this because testing is so important. So I’ve set that goal of 100,000, we’re working 24/7 to hit it. Everybody can see the daily trajectory which has almost doubled since I set it and we’ve clearly got a lot of work to do to get to 100,000 but we are on track. The second question was to you professor?"
"809","Jonathan Van-Tam: (35:22);Yes. Thank you Hannah. Oxygen. This disease is unlike anything I’ve seen in my almost three decades in medicine. It is really, really unusual in that the requirement for patients who are hospitalized to have oxygen is very high, and sorry to go back to the host pipe analogy, but if everyone in a certain area turns on their sprinkler in the garden at the same time, the water pressure will go down for a while, and it is a logistic and engineering challenge to create all those thousands of extra intensive care beds that we have done, with ventilators, and also secure the oxygen supply that goes behind them."
"810","Jonathan Van-Tam: (36:21);Now, I do know that there has been absolutely enormous logistic work 24/7, behind the scenes, to keep hospitals supplied with oxygen. But you’re right, we have seen one or two reports of where something has gone slightly wrong with an oxygen supply and that’s partly about the stress on the whole engineering system of a hospital that is required to produce the oxygen demands for double the number of ventilators, and we have to learn as we go along, and our engineers have to adapt, and you are going to see these isolated incidents and we’ll learn from them. But oxygen supply, you’re right to flag it. It’s an unprecedented demand with this virus."
"811","Matt Hancock: (37:18);You might’ve been referring to the challenges that we have in Watford last weekend in the question. I don’t know if there was more detail you wanted to ask about?"
"812","Hannah Al-Othman: (37:25);Specifically, to our own story, we spoke to doctors across the country who said they were concerned by things that they were being told such as, that they may not be able to give oxygen to palliative care patients. Then when we spoke to the BMA they said they were really concerned by those reports and it’s something that the government should be taking seriously."
"813","Matt Hancock: (37:48);Okay. So the truth is that in all the challenges in oxygen supply that Professor Van-Tam has just set out, in all cases that has been available ventilated oxygen to be able to treat those who need it. In fact, we have currently over 2000 spare beds with ventilators. So we have spare capacity, and in fact, the spare capacity is currently going up faster than need so the overall capacity is going out faster than need. So the spare capacity is increasing."
"814","Matt Hancock: (38:27);So to anybody listening or watching, the message is very clear, which is there is enough capacity in the NHS to look after you no matter if you catch it, how serious it gets. But it’s very important that we don’t allow the spread of the virus to accelerate because we’ve got to keep that demand below the levels of supply even though, as we increase supply."
"815","Matt Hancock: (38:52);On the point about whether an individual patient should be put onto a ventilator, that is a different question. It’s not about the capacity. It’s not about the …"
"816","Matt Hancock: (39:03);… availability of beds. It’s about a clinical judgment for each and every person and that should never be made on a blanket basis. It should always be made on the basis of advice of clinicians as to what is in the best interests of the patient. It’s something that came up, I think last time Ruth and I were at this press conference, and we talked about it with respect to do not resuscitate notices, which are standard part of any healthcare system, but there is no link between the capacity of the NHS and the needs of an individual because we have, thankfully, so far in all circumstances managed to keep the available capacity above the demand curve."
"817","Matt Hancock: (39:56);The reason we’ve been able to do that is because people are following the social distancing advice and staying at home. If they weren’t, that would be much more of a challenge. So if anybody needs another motivation as to why you should stay at home and follow the social distancing rules, it’s precisely because we don’t want the concerns that you raised, understandably, in your question to become the reality across the NHS. I don’t know whether you’ve got anything else to add Ruth?"
"818","Ruth May: (40:27);I mean, you’re absolutely right. Secretary of State, clinicians from all sorts of backgrounds are making those decisions all of the time, even when patients are not in intensive care, people are needing oxygen and clinicians are doing that day in, day out. They’ll make sure that if a patient, a person at home, wherever they are, if they need to have oxygen, clinicians will be needed to do that, and they will."
"819","Matt Hancock: (40:51);Thanks very much. Dave West from the Health Service Journal."
"820","Dave West: (40:55);Hi there. Firstly, for the Secretary of State, we’ve heard consistently from yourself and from government about the vital importance of staying at home to really relieve pressure on the NHS and to save lives. We’ve also heard that if you do need to travel to work, you should, if humanly possible, keep going social distancing measures and stay two meters apart from each other. We’ve been told since your illness and the prime minister’s illness that government is conducting its business in a way so as to achieve this as far as humanly possible."
"821","Dave West: (41:31);Yet we’ve learned that a number of times in recent days, you’ve continued to hold meetings, yourself, in your office, with between 10 and 20 senior officials and their assistants, clearly not able to observe those rules, staying two meters apart and not working from home. Senior NHS officials dialing into those meetings have expressed concerns to us about the example that sets to their staff and why they will behave and concerns that they will in turn think that they need to be turning up to work and it’s irresponsible not to. So are you going to stop holding those meetings in that way or do you think that it’s impossible for you to meet those rules?"
"822","Dave West: (42:17);And then the question to Ruth or to Jonathan is a followup on Anna’s about the wider health impact. Although Mr. Hancock said, thankfully, the NHS hasn’t been overwhelmed by the demand that’s there, there are many people choosing not to come to accident and emergency even when they have serious health complaints, and it is much harder to get an ambulance, a call out, for example, a much longer wait and as well as on top of the care that’s having to be canceled, so there obviously has an impact on health care. I wondered your view, Jonathan, or Ruth, about whether you agree with professionals in the NHS who are concerned that there could be a rebound effect over the next few weeks or month, which can be quite a substantial and sharp effect or follow up demand many people seeking and needing access to healthcare services over that period?"
"823","Matt Hancock: (43:12);Well, thanks Dave. On the first one, I work from home when I can, and we have enormous numbers of meetings on Zoom and other video conferencing facilities, which I think has been, in many cases, extremely helpful. When I do come into the office, I follow social distancing rules and that’s very clear around my table. There’s now only a small number of chairs when there used to be, like everybody, even these podia here used to be closer and we’ve moved them further apart. So like the rest of the country we follow social distancing guidelines and I think that’s really important. On the second question, I think if I ask Professor Van-Tam to answer that"
"824","Jonathan Van-Tam: (44:02);Yes. Thank you Dave. I think I’d answer that in a fairly simple way really, that because of the extraordinary efforts that people are making on social distancing, we have stopped the NHS from becoming overwhelmed because without it, I can assure you it absolutely would have been, and several weeks ago. What that means is of course that by stopping the NHS from being overwhelmed, we protect its other vital functions and other emergencies will go on if we know that. Road traffic accidents will still occur. Obviously, at lower levels now the traffic density is down very dramatically. But cardiac emergencies will continue, and an important message for the British people is that for those emergencies, the NHS is open business as usual and that’s the great thing about having stopped it from falling over with coronavirus that it can stay open for those critical things."
"825","Matt Hancock: (45:07);Thanks. I’ll just add one further comment to that which is really important, which is that if you need the NHS for something unrelated to coronavirus, then you should use it. In the first instance, a phone up your GP or call 111. We’ve seen a fall in the number of people self-reporting for at risk of cancer diagnosis. We’ve seen a fall in the number of people self-reporting chest pain and risk of stroke, and we want the message to get out there loud and clear that if you have a significant health problem, then please do access the NHS."
"826","Matt Hancock: (45:54);If you’re worried about coronavirus, which is entirely understandable, then phone first, either your GP or 111, or of course, if it’s urgent, call 999 because we clearly want people who have other health problems, especially, if they are urgent and or life threatening, to contact the NHS so that they can get the amazing service that the NHS provides to us all."
"827","Ruth May: (46:25);[crosstalk 00:00:46:25]."
"828","Matt Hancock: (46:25);Yes, of course."
"829","Ruth May: (46:26);One quick point, and that’s particularly important for women that are pregnant too. We want to make sure that you have the confidence to contact your midwife. If your fetal movements are less than they were, please contact your midwives because those are really important, and about the demand, that’s exactly why we have recruited and we’ve got 8,000 people now, 8,000 nurses, are coming back onto our front line to support to make sure that we up and running, and indeed over 12,000 student nurses and midwives are there ready to come back and support us. So we are ready to care for you, whether it’s COVID or non-COVID related."
"830","Matt Hancock: (47:09);Okay. Thanks very much. Well, that concludes our press conference today from Downing street with huge thanks to a Deputy Chief Medical Officer, Jonathan Van-Tam and the Chief Nursing Officer, Ruth May. Thanks very much indeed."
"831","Dominic Raab: (00:02);I also want to say big thank you to the carers, the charity workers, all those looking after, or even just keeping an eye on, those in their local neighborhood. You are the lifeline to so many people in our communities."
"832","Dominic Raab: (00:17);Thank you to the workers who keep the country running. The supermarket work is the delivery drivers, the technicians, the cleaners, the public servants who just kept going, determined to keep providing the daily services that we all rely on. I think you’ve certainly made us all think long and hard about who the key workers are in our lives."
"833","Dominic Raab: (00:39);Thank you to the volunteers who have stepped up across the country, whose big-hearted sense of responsibility defines British community spirit at its very best."
"834","Dominic Raab: (00:51);A massive thank you to every single person who stayed home to stop this terrible virus from spreading. You’ve helped protect the NHS and you’ve helped to save lives."
"835","Dominic Raab: (01:04);Now as we look forward to the long bank holiday Easter weekend, I know some people are going to start wondering, “Is it time to ease up on the rules?” I have to say thank you for your sacrifice, but also we’re not done yet. We must keep going. Let me just explain a little bit about why that’s so important."
"836","Dominic Raab: (01:25);Today, I chaired a COBRA meeting with a senior ministers officials and representatives from Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland as well as the mayor of London so that we could take stock and assess where we are right across the United Kingdom. At this stage, the government is continuing to gather all of the relevant data to obtain the fullest picture possible of the effects of the social-distancing measures that we’ve put in place."
"837","Dominic Raab: (01:51);Now, while the early signs suggest that they are having the impact that we need to see, it’s too early to say that conclusively. Sage, will meet next week to discuss the latest evidence and we’ll keep the measures we’ve put in place under review. As we’ve said on many occasions now, we’ll be guided by the science at all times, so we don’t expect to be able to say more on this until the end of next week. And let me just be again very clear about this, the measures will have to stay in place until we’ve got the evidence that clearly shows we’ve moved beyond the peak."
"838","Dominic Raab: (02:28);I know these restrictions take their toll day in, day out on people’s livelihoods, on people’s quality of life, on people’s mental health. I appreciate that it’s often the little things that hurt the most. With the Easter bank holiday coming up, I’d normally spend it with my two boys, seven and five years old, with their grandparents, doing an Easter egg hunt. I know there’s going to be lots of people who would normally be planning a family get-together or just getting out in the sunshine with friends and loved ones. Unfortunately, right now we just can’t do those sorts of things. I’m really sorry about that. But just take a moment to think of the progress that we’ve already made following the guidance, staying at home, denying the virus what it needs to spread more easily and to kill more people."
"839","Dominic Raab: (03:19);It’s been almost three weeks and we’re starting to see the impact of the sacrifices we’ve all made, but the deaths are still rising and we haven’t yet reached the peak of the virus. It’s still too early to lift the measures that we’ve put in place. We must stick to the plan and we must continue to be guided by the science."
"840","Dominic Raab: (03:42);Our top priority, our immediate priority remains to slow the spread of the virus and to save as many lives as possible. That’s why we have to continue to ask you all to keep complying with the guidance. As we’ve said consistently from the outset, it’s vital we take the right decisions at the right time and the most important thing right now is that people continue to follow the government’s guidance until we’ve got the evidence that the virus is firmly under control, so that means please do stay at home to protect our NHS and to save lives. After all the efforts that everyone’s made, after all the sacrifices so many people have made, let’s not ruin it now, let’s not undo the gains we’ve made, let’s not waste the sacrifices so many people have made. We mustn’t give the coronavirus a second chance to kill more people and to hurt our country. I know it’s tough going, but this is a team effort and we’ll only defeat this virus for good if we all stay the course, so please stay home this bank holiday weekend for everyone’s sake."
"841","Dominic Raab: (04:52);I will turn to Sir Patrick to give us an update on the very latest data. Sir Patrick, over to you."
"842","Sir Patrick Vallance: (04:57);Thank you very much."
"843","Sir Patrick Vallance: (04:58);As the first secretary has said, the measures that everybody has taken, the difficult things that we’ve all had to do, are making a difference and they’re making a big difference. We know that the social distancing is working and we know that people are doing what they’re supposed to do and we need to keep doing that. The reason we need to keep doing that is because it stops the transmission of the virus in the community and we know that that is already happening. Next slide please. As a result of stopping the transmission in the community, we stop new cases appearing. This slide, the numbers go up and down a bit, but what you can see is it’s not taking off in that sharp uptake. It’s not gone sky high, and if anything there might even be some flattening. That is because of what we’re all doing with social distancing. If we had not done that, those cases would now be very much higher. If those cases were higher, next slide please."
"844","Sir Patrick Vallance: (06:04);Then this graph wouldn’t look like this. We would find many, many more people in hospital. We would find the health system potentially overrun. What you can see on this graph is the increase in hospital admissions, people in hospital beds with COVID. It has gone up across the country, but it’s not gone up in that steep way. Again, if anything, we’re beginning to see the first signs of this leveling off. Too early to be sure, too early to know that this is on the way down, but it’s not got that fast upswing that it would have had had you all, we all, not been doing what we are doing with these difficult measures of social distancing. If the hospital beds were fuller, next slide please."
"845","Sir Patrick Vallance: (06:53);Then importantly, so would the intensive care units be even fuller. People are working heroically in intensive care units to look after the very sick patients who are there. But again, this is not the sharp upstroke, big increases in numbers. It’s a steady increase in numbers, which might, just might, be beginning to flatten off, but it’s certainly not accelerating. That means that the NHS can cope. It’s got the right numbers of beds with the new expansion in order to be able to cope with this. If we were not doing what we’re doing and if we don’t continue to do what we’re doing in terms of the social distancing, we put all of this at risk. We jeopardize the thing that’s allowed us to get to this position. If I can have the last slide please."
"846","Sir Patrick Vallance: (07:42);Unfortunately, sadly, there are deaths from this disease. Those continue to rise and you can see here the increase in rise in the UK and in other countries. This will not change for a few weeks because the deaths come after the other illnesses, the earlier illness, the intensive care, and then in some patients unfortunately die and that will continue to increase for a few weeks. We need to see this begin to go down as well. It should follow the others."
"847","Sir Patrick Vallance: (08:15);The message is clear, which is the social distancing that we’re all doing is breaking transmission. It’s stopping the hospital admissions, beginning to see that flattening off, still unbelievably busy, but beginning to see that flatten off. It’s preventing more people going into intensive care and it will prevent deaths. It’s incredibly important we continue to do what we’re doing."
"848","Dominic Raab: (08:39);Thank you, Patrick. Now if we take some questions from the media, I think Hugh Pym from the BBC is first up. Hugh?"
"849","Hugh Pym: (08:49);Thank you. We’ve heard some harrowing stories of people dying alone because family can’t be with them for understandable reasons to do with the virus risk. What do you say to the British public about how things will-"
"850","Hugh Pym: (09:03);… develop from here?"
"851","Dominic Raab: (09:04);Well, the first thing I would say is thank you for all you’re doing, not just the key workers, as essential as they are and we applaud them for the incredible work they’ve done, but also to every individual who’s followed the advice and the guidance."
"852","Dominic Raab: (09:19);We’ve made progress. Patrick has set that out, I think very clearly, but we don’t know conclusively that we’re beyond the point at which we could start considering whether the measures will be relaxed. We must keep it up. I think the key thing is for people to understand, how much of what they’ve already done has helped contribute to avoiding an even worse situation in terms of the spread of the virus and the number of deaths, and how important it is that we don’t slow up or take our pressure off at this critical moment before we’ve come through the peak."
"853","Dominic Raab: (09:52);We recognize the sacrifices so many people have made. It’s a team effort and as a country we need to be united in this mission. We’ve got to keep it up."
"854","Dominic Raab: (10:02);Did you want to come back with anything further Hugh?"
"855","Hugh Pym: (10:06);Maybe to Patrick Vallance. A little bit more on the death projections that you have got. I know it’s difficult, but how long and how fast do you expect the deaths to carry on rising?"
"856","Patrick Vallance: (10:20);In general, I’d expect the deaths to continue to keep going up for about two weeks after the intensive care picture improves. We’re not there yet in terms of knowing exactly when that will be, but that’s the sort of timeframe I’d expect."
"857","Dominic Raab: (10:35);Sam Coates from Sky."
"858","Sam Coates: (10:39);I suspect Britain needs a little bit of hope going into this Easter weekend, so Dominic Raab, will the government set out in public the principles that will guide you when you do finally come to lifting this lockdown? Angela Merkel, the German Chancellor said today that the German government would do that next week. Can you commit to doing something similar?"
"859","Sam Coates: (11:02);And to Chris Whitty, two or three weeks ago you were very concerned about the speed that the coronavirus was ripping through communities. Can you say how fast it is now going, being transmitted? Has that transmission rate now come down or is it still going through Britain as fast as it was?"
"860","Dominic Raab: (11:23);Thanks Sam. We’ll look, the positive is that I think as we’ve hopefully set out clearly we can show people that all the sacrifices that they’ve been made and all the forbearance that they’ve showed has made a real difference. It has saved lives, it has helped protect the NHS."
"861","Dominic Raab: (11:38);We’re obviously not on the same point along the peak as the Germans, so I’m not sure that the direct analysis works, but what we will do is continue to be followed by the evidence and the science. As we’ve always said, and as I said earlier, we’ll take the right decisions at the right moment in time."
"862","Dominic Raab: (11:56);[inaudible 00:11:56] Patrick?"
"863","Chris Whitty: (11:56);Answering directly the question that you asked about the speed. At the time when I was first talking about this, the doubling time, how fast we were doubling in terms of numbers, particularly in intensive care, was around about three days. It varied a bit. This has got steadily longer in time over the last two weeks thanks to what people have done. As Patrick showed in the data, this is really now becoming not quite flat but it is doubling time is now six or more days in almost everywhere in the country and extending in time."
"864","Chris Whitty: (12:31);That has only happened because of what everybody has done, what we’ve all done in terms of staying at home and only going out for work, exercise and critical shopping and medical care."
"865","Chris Whitty: (12:44);If I can just add one thing in terms of the principles, and this is not principles except in the narrow sense of health, I think it’s important to remember that the direct effects of people dying from coronavirus and this has been affected by people helping to pull the curve down, but there are also indirect effects which have to be taken into account when we’re thinking about the health effects over the longterm. Those include, the indirect effects were the NHS to be overwhelmed and because of people’s actions, there is still room in intensive care. There’s still room in the emergency services across the country in terms of other health issues."
"866","Chris Whitty: (13:24);But we also have to remember the effects on things that have to be delayed to free up NHS space. And we have to think about the longterm health effects of some of the economic measures. These are all health things and there are other economic and other things that need to be taken into account by ministers, but for me as a doctor, I’m thinking about the health things. All of these need to be taken into account in working out how is the best way to go to the next stage in this epidemic."
"867","Patrick Vallance: (13:52);If I can also come in, if I may?"
"868","Sam Coates: (13:54);Please."
"869","Patrick Vallance: (13:54);Chris spoke about the doubling time in intensive care, which has got longer. If you look in the community at the moment, you would expect there to be no doubling time. This is not doubling. In the community. you would expect this now to be shrinking for all the reasons I’ve said. And the evidence suggests that that is what’s happening in terms of the transmission in community. So that all points in the right direction. And the doubling time in ICU is a reflection of what’s happening earlier and the efforts that have been made in terms of social distancing."
"870","Dominic Raab: (14:25);Sam did you want to follow up?"
"871","Sam Coates: (14:28);Just in terms of publishing the principles that we will rely on, perhaps not next week because we are, as you say, in a different place to Germany, but will the British government at some point explain to the British people in a document, the tradeoffs and the evidence about how they’re going to go about lifting the lockdown?"
"872","Dominic Raab: (14:47);Well look, we’ll make the right decisions at the right moments and we’ll be guided by the science. I think that’s really all I’d say at this point. But just remember, I think the focus, and we don’t see any distraction from that, as we look forward to the long bank holiday weekend, is just picking up on the evidence that Patrick and Chris have set out, is not to take our eye off the ball, not to undo all the good work, not to undo the sacrifices so many people have made by becoming more lax, or failing to follow the guidance at just the moment where we need to make sure we double down, follow the guidance, get through this peak."
"873","Dominic Raab: (15:23);I think that’s the most important thing right now."
"874","Dominic Raab: (15:26);Hannah Miller from ITV Granada."
"875","Hannah Miller: (15:30);Thank you, Foreign Secretary. Two questions for you. Today, Greater Manchester police revealed that last weekend they received reports of more than a thousand gatherings. How can they possibly be expected to police that when around a fifth of their staff are not in work?"
"876","Hannah Miller: (15:44);And secondly, I want to talk to you about furloughing. We’ve spoken to a blind warehouse worker in Rochdale called Joe. He is worried about being able to socially distance and he’s being told to go in or to take unpaid leave. The government said it wants employers to take socially responsible decisions. Does that sound socially responsible to you?"
"877","Dominic Raab: (16:06);I don’t know all the details of the case, but he sounds like a very vulnerable individual. We’ve provided the support to employers, we know they’re under pressure and we want all businesses to do the right thing. We’re doing our bit and I think it’s important for us all to pull together and particularly for the most vulnerable in our communities. I’d want employees to think long and hard if they have people like that, who they’re employing and who are within their care in a broader sense."
"878","Dominic Raab: (16:32);On the issue, I think it was Greater Manchester police. The police doing a great job and it’s a very difficult line for them to walk, but I think they’re doing a terrific job. Above all, as we go into this long bank holiday weekend, I think people should think very long and hard, not just about the guidance and the importance of keeping up, but about what happens to those on the NHS frontline who are doing a heroic job if people in large numbers don’t comply with those rules. I would urge everyone just to take a moment before they do anything, however warm it is, however great the temptation, just to think about the sacrifices those in the frontline, particularly in our NHS are making."
"879","Dominic Raab: (17:15);Did you want to come back again?"
"880","Hannah Miller: (17:17);Thank you. Yeah, thanks. Just on the furloughing and guidance around people with disabilities. Do you accept that the guidance around social distancing for people with disabilities perhaps needs to be looked at in a bit more detail?"
"881","Patrick Vallance: (17:31);Well, we can certainly take another look at it, but of course it’s the way it’s applied that’s really important. With a flexibility, and again as I said, a sense of the fact that we’re all in this together and we’ll pull through this together. We can always look at the guidance. We want to make sure it’s as clear as possible, but it’s the way it’s implemented as well, which is really important."
"882","Patrick Vallance: (17:51);Ben Kentish from LBC."
"883","Ben Kentish: (17:55);Thank you, Foreign Secretary. You talked about the sacrifices that NHS workers are making, and we’re hearing more stories of that today. People losing their lives."
"884","Ben Kentish: (18:03);In some cases, they’re telling us, because they haven’t got the right equipment. Now, to thank them for that work, thousands of people around the country tonight will take part in the Clap for Our Carers. But I wondered if, today, you could go further and commit to, when this crisis is over, giving them a real reward, a financial thank you for the sacrifices that they’re making on behalf of us all?"
"885","Ben Kentish: (18:27);If I may, could I ask the Chief Scientific Advisor, Matt Hancock, the Health Secretary, mentioned last week that a surveillance study was being carried out with an antibody test that’s been developed by Public Health England. Could you tell us what the early results of that show, in terms of how many people in Britain have had the virus? How many would you expect to have had it in the 12 to 18 months or so until a vaccine is developed? Thank you."
"886","Dominic Raab: (18:55);I think that they’re really good points. I think the carers, and all those on the front line, as I paid tribute to in my earlier remarks, have done an amazing job. We’re obviously doing everything we can to provide the equipment, the PPE, that they need. We’re rolling that out at pace. I recognize that there have been challenges with the distribution. We’ve got a help line, but most importantly, we’re really rolling that out in pace. We’ve got the military involved where that’s appropriate."
"887","Dominic Raab: (19:22);I’ll be taking part in the Clap for Carers this evening. You’re right, there will be a moment where we look at how we formally recognize all of those on the front line who have done so much to pull us through this very difficult period for our country."
"888","Sir Patrick Vallance: (19:36);On the surveillance test, [inaudible 00:19:37] the antibody test. The first thing to say is that these tests are difficult to get right. Across the world, people are trying to get really specific and sensitive tests on this, and that’s a lot of collaboration across the world to do that."
"889","Sir Patrick Vallance: (19:50);The scientists at Public Health England have worked on this, and yes, there is a surveillance study underway. I don’t know the results yet. They’re not out. This will continue until we’ve got the right results, and they’re able to communicate them. Of course, they will communicate them, like all good scientific practice, as soon as they’re ready, and they know what they show, and they can validate that these are reliable results. That’s what’s going on at the moment."
"890","Sir Patrick Vallance: (20:15);In terms of how many people would you expect to get this before a vaccine or treatment comes along, I think the processes that we’ve got in place are clearly to suppress the number. The idea is to try to keep that number as low as possible."
"891","Dominic Raab: (20:28);Did you want to come back on any of that, Ben?"
"892","Ben Kentish: (20:31);If I may, Foreign Secretary, you said there would be a time to reward NHS workers. I wonder if you might just [inaudible 00:20:37] on a personal level, what form you think that should take?"
"893","Dominic Raab: (20:40);Well, I do think it’s important, while they’re doing this great job, and we’re all trying to focus on getting us through the peak, that we keep our focus and our attention on that. I’d want to give it proper thought, with all of the other people in government. But what I would say is I think we all recognize the enormous sacrifice they’ve made. How much it’s done to help pull us through, even to this level, how much it’s done to avoid some of the worse scenarios we could have otherwise faced. I’m sure there will be the appropriate level of recognition at the right moment, once we’re through the worst of it."
"894","Dominic Raab: (21:15);Oliver Wright, from The Times."
"895","Oliver Wright: (21:17);Thank you. A question, first, to Professor Whitty, if I may. We know that the daily death figures that you’re reporting come from the NHS, but we’re expecting next week figures from the Office of National Statistics which will be wider than that. Do you expect that when you take into account care homes and other settings that we’ll see a significant rise in the total death rate?"
"896","Oliver Wright: (21:42);Just to follow up on Ben’s point, with Sir Patrick, John Newton said last week on this antibody study that’s being carried out at Porton Down that they were days away from having preliminary results. You say that you haven’t seen the results, but would you anticipate that those results were being made available to the SAGE Committee that will advise ministers on the next stage in the lockdown?"
"897","Dominic Raab: (22:10);You can go first, Chris."
"898","Chris Whitty: (22:10);On the NHS figures versus the ONS figures, so they measure different things. The reason the NHS figures are very useful for us is that we an get them very fast, and they are collected in the same way the whole time, and they’re very comparable, actually, to international figures, which tend to be collected in the same way. What that allows us to do is what Patrick was doing at the beginning, which is to see in relatively near time the trends over time, because it’s a very stable way of collecting the data. Those NHS figures are all people who are proven to have coronavirus on testing, so they’re definitely cases in hospitals."
"899","Chris Whitty: (22:50);The ONS figures are much wider than that. I would therefore expect that it’s not just that they go further outside hospital. They also include people who have, sadly, died where the doctor thinks that coronavirus may be involved, even if there is no test involved in that decision. I would expect those numbers to be higher, but because it takes longer for the data to come in, that’s always going to be a lag between those two amounts, which makes the ONS data extremely useful for looking at the wider picture, but the NHS data is more useful for us to make decisions day-to-day, and to make decisions, for example, about what we need to change in terms of our current interventions."
"900","Sir Patrick Vallance: (23:32);The answer to the question is yes, of course we would expect to see those results in SAGE, and we’ll see them when they are ready, and the studies have been completed, and they’ve been properly analyzed. We spend a lot of time looking at this from across the world, as well. Had calls with colleagues from many countries earlier this week on this very topic. Had a call last night with somebody from Stanford University working in this area. This is something we look at right the way across the world all the time, and of course, the PHE results will come to SAGE when they’re ready."
"901","Dominic Raab: (24:00);Do you want to come back on any of that? No?"
"902","Oliver Wright: (24:02);Just would like to ask you, Mr. Raab, if it’s possible, have you managed to have any contact with the Prime Minister since you took over his responsibilities, at all?"
"903","Dominic Raab: (24:10);Not, yet. I think it’s important to, particularly while he’s in intensive care, to let him focus on the recovery. We in the government have got this covered. I chaired the COBRA meeting that I’ve just come from. We are pursuing all of the different strands of our strategy to defeat the coronavirus, and I’m confident we’ll get there."
"904","Dominic Raab: (24:32);George Parker from the FT."
"905","George Parker: (24:33);Question for the Foreign Secretary. I’d like to ask you about the Bank of England’s decision today to effectively extend its overdraft facility for the government. We’re told this is a temporary measure, but nevertheless, it’s very unusual. Can you explain exactly why the government needs this facility, and is it possibly because the cost of your economic interventions to address the crisis are costing more than you expected, particularly the job retention scheme? Separate question for Professor Whitty. We heard today from U.S. scientific equipment maker Thermo Fisher that they have an agreement with the government to supply 100,000 swab tests a day, at least. Can I just check that is correct? If so, what are we waiting for?"
"906","Dominic Raab: (25:19);George, on the Bank of England decision, obviously, we’ve got an independent Bank of England. They make those decisions autonomously. As you said, it’s a temporary measure, but the broader picture is, from the fiscal measures that the Chancellor has taken through to the measures taken by the Bank of England, we want to make sure that we’re in the best position. Not just to see us through this crisis from a health point-of-view, as important as that is, but also from an economic point-of-view. We are making sure that we use all of the levers across government to achieve that."
"907","Chris Whitty: (25:50);On the testing, we’re ramping up every day on the testing. But I think it’s important to differentiate between tests available and ready to run, and the whole system running, in terms of in the lab, and actually having the whole system running so you’re very confident that someone who needs a test can order the right test and get the right result back."
"908","Chris Whitty: (26:09);The whole process is going up every single day this month. I expect to see an increase in the number of tests that go out and the number of results that come back, including Thermo Fisher, but not only Thermo Fisher. There are quite a few other groups who are involved in this."
"909","Dominic Raab: (26:24);Did you want to follow up there, George?"
"910","George Parker: (26:26);Yeah, just a very quick one to Sir Chris Whitty. I mean, doesn’t this really reflect the fact that the problem lies in our laboratories, and not through any, for example, shortage of chemicals, which is something that Michael Gove said last week?"
"911","George Parker: (26:39);Mr. Raab, very quickly, going back to your earlier opening remarks, you said that the [inaudible 00:26:43] will have to stay in place until we have evidence that clearly shows that we have moved beyond the peak. Should we assume, therefore, that once we have evidence that shows we have moved beyond the peak, that the restrictions will start to be eased?"
"912","Dominic Raab: (26:57);Well, I think the whole point is not to make assumptions, but to be guided by the evidence when we’ve got it. I don’t know, Chris, what do want to…"
"913","Dominic Raab: (27:03);[crosstalk 00:27:03]"
"914","Chris Whitty: (27:03);In terms of kit, there was a period when both swabs and reagents were in short supply. That’s beginning to sort itself out. A testing process is a long chain, of which actually doing the test is in the middle of it, but there are large parts either side. But you’re absolutely right that that was a barrier. It’s much less of a barrier, although it has not gone away completely. But it is a lot better than it was."
"915","Dominic Raab: (27:29);Thanks, George. Hugo Guy from The Eye."
"916","Hugo Guy: (27:34);Thank you. Foreign Secretary, can I just ask you to clarify the extent of your own authority in the Prime Minister’s absence? We’re aware you’re chairing the committees and the cabinet that he would normally do. Are you authorized to make big decisions, for example on lifting the lockdown, a decision that’s going to have to come next week? If the Prime Minister is still unavailable, can you make that decision in the same way that he would do?"
"917","Hugo Guy: (28:04);And Sir Patrick, can I just ask, as you pointed out, the mass surveillance testing results are not yet available. Do you have any estimate at all for how many people in the UK have probably been infected with coronavirus, or are we just still flying blind on that one?"
"918","Dominic Raab: (28:30);Thanks very much, Hugo. Look, I’ve got all authority I need to make the relevant decisions, whether it’s through chairing cabinet updates, as I did earlier in the week, chairing Cobra, or indeed the morning meetings of senior ministers. We’ve got a great team. It’s a team effort. Obviously, it’s not exactly the same as when the Prime Minister was here. That’s very clear. But as his first secretary, deputized to discharge his responsibilities, we’ve got all the authority we need."
"919","Sir Patrick: (28:57);I think in terms of the test, one of the reasons it’s so important to get that test out is to try and work out the proportion of people who may have had the disease asymptomatically. I think across the world it’s looking less likely that it’s a very high number. It’s not likely that it’s 90% of people have had it asymptomatically. Much more likely, it’s lower than 50, could be around 30, but we don’t know for sure."
"920","Sir Patrick: (29:22);In terms of the number of people who’ve had it in each country, that’s why the antibody test is so important. There are beginning to be some stories of people getting answers to that question. Again, I wouldn’t expect that to be a high percentage. Most of the figures that come out so far are low single-digit percentages, but we need to see. There’s a couple of examples of slightly higher percentages than that, but these are early data, and we need to make sure that we’ve got the right information."
"921","Dominic Raab: (29:49);Would you like a supplementary there, Hugo?"
"922","Hugo Guy: (29:52);Well, yeah. Can I just clarify, Sir Patrick? Appreciate the picture is still unclear, but you would expect it to be, for example, well under 10%, probably, of people in the UK have been infected, by comparison to the situation in other countries? Is that fair enough?"
"923","Sir Patrick: (30:09);I can’t tell you what the answer’s going to be. We need to do the experiment, find out the answer. But from what I’ve seen from other places, it’s mainly single-digit numbers, and it could be a bit higher in some places."
"924","Dominic Raab: (30:20);Andrew MacAskill from Reuters."
"925","Andrew MacAskill: (30:24);Many thanks. I’ve got two quick questions for the advisers. First, for Sir Patrick, why did your [inaudible 00:30:30] committee, as members told Reuters, not begin reviewing and modeling the consequences of a full lockdown across the country until mid-March? And for Chris Whitty, I’ve got to ask, Britain created a coronavirus test on January the 10th. Why did it take more than two months to contact many labs to ask them to create capacity to carry out tests?"
"926","Sir Patrick: (30:52);Thank you. Maybe I’ll tell you what happened, and that’s the easiest way to answer the question, which is, we started working on this in January. We had our first SAGE meeting in January. We had a pre-SAGE before the 24th, I think it was, of January. We had an earlier meeting, and in February, we modeled all of the interventions that you’ve now seen. Those interventions were modeled, looked at in SAGE, including scenarios of full lockdown to push the peak out to autumn. They were done throughout February. That’s why in early March it was possible for the Department of Health and Social Care to publish an action plan which included all of the measures, and reported that all of these might be necessary at some point, and they needed to be put in the right combination and in certain orders to get the maximum benefit. So it’s not correct that we didn’t model it till March. We modeled it throughout February, and that was, of course, what led to the action plan."
"927","Chris Whitty: (31:50);Yeah. On testing, you’ve got to remember, this is a completely new virus initially. From the time that, actually, the Chinese scientists put the genotype on the web, which was a fantastic first step, we moved incredibly quickly to get a first test. There was quite a rapid ramp-up, but it initially had to start off to be sure the test worked. To make a point which I’ve made before, getting a test that’s inaccurate is really unhelpful. So we had to be confident about that, and then it was rolled out in stages, and it continues to be rolled out in stages, and will continue all the way through this month."
"928","Dominic Raab: (32:22);Andrew, would you like a final question?"
"929","Andrew MacAskill: (32:25);Yeah, just to follow up on that point, we were told by … This is to Sir Patrick. John Edmunds told us that neither him or Neil Ferguson carried out any modeling for the lockdown until March. I’m just wondering why there’s that discrepancy there."
"930","Sir Patrick: (32:39);Well, I don’t know exactly what John said to you and what he didn’t say to you. I know what happened, and I’ve just told you what happened. The modeling came in from a variety of sources."
"931","Dominic Raab: (32:49);Thanks, Andrew. Thank you all very much."
"932","Boris Johnson: (00:16);Good evening. The coronavirus is the biggest threat this country has faced for decades, and this country is not alone. All over the world, we’re seeing the devastating impact of this invisible killer. Tonight, I want to update you on the latest steps we’re taking to fight the disease and what you can do to help. I want to begin by reminding you why the UK has been taking the approach that we have."
"933","Boris Johnson: (00:43);Without a huge national effort to halt the growth of this virus, there will come a moment where no health service in the world could possibly cope, because there won’t be enough ventilators, enough intensive care beds, enough doctors and nurses. As we’ve seen elsewhere, in other countries that also have fantastic healthcare systems, that is the moment of real danger. To put it simply, if too many people become seriously unwell at one time, the NHS will be unable to handle it, meaning more people are likely to die, not just from coronavirus but from other illnesses as well. So it’s vital to slow the spread of the disease because that is the way we reduce the number of people needing hospital treatment at any one time so we can protect the NHS’s ability to cope and save more lives. That’s why we’ve been asking people to stay at home during this pandemic. Though huge numbers are complying, and I thank you all, the time has now come for us all to do more."
"934","Boris Johnson: (01:56);From this evening, I must give the British people a very simple instruction. You must stay at home, because the critical thing we must do to stop the disease spreading between households. That is why people will only be allowed to leave their home for the following very limited purposes: Shopping for basic necessities as infrequently as possible, one form of exercise a day, for example, a run, walk, or cycle alone or with members of your household, any medical need to provide care or to help a vulnerable person, and traveling to and from work, but only where this is absolutely necessary and cannot be done from home. That’s all. These are the only reasons you should leave your home. You should not be meeting friends. If your friends ask you to meet, you should say no. You should not be meeting family members who do not live in your home. You should not be going shopping except for essentials like food and medicine, and you should do this as little as you can and use food delivery services where you can."
"935","Boris Johnson: (03:12);If you don’t follow the rules, the police will have the powers to enforce them, including through fines and disbursing gatherings. To ensure compliance with the government’s instruction to stay at home, we will immediately close all shops selling non-essential goods, including clothing and electronics stores and other premises, including libraries, playgrounds, and outdoor gyms and places of worship. We’ll stop all gatherings of more than two people in public, excluding people you live with. And we’ll stop all social events including weddings, baptisms, and other ceremonies, but excluding funerals. Parks will remain open for exercise, but gatherings will be dispersed."
"936","Boris Johnson: (04:05);No prime minister wants to enact measures like this. I know the damage that this disruption is doing and will do to people’s lives, to their businesses, and to their jobs. That’s why we’ve produced a huge and unprecedented program of support, both for workers and for business. I can assure you that we will keep these restrictions under constant review. We will look again in three weeks and relax them if the evidence shows we are able to. But at present, there are just no easy options. The way ahead is hard, and it is still true that many lives will sadly be lost."
"937","Boris Johnson: (04:52);And yet it is also true that there is a clear way through. Day-by-day we are strengthening our amazing NHS with 7,500 former clinicians now coming back to the service. With the time you buy, by simply staying at home, we are increasing our stocks of equipment, we are accelerating our search for treatments, we’re pioneering work on a vaccine, and we are buying millions of testing kits that will enable us to turn the tide on this invisible killer."
"938","Boris Johnson: (05:25);I want to thank everyone who is working flat out to beat the virus, everyone from the supermarket staff to the transport workers, to the carers, to the nurses and doctors on the frontline. But in this fight, we can be in no doubt that each and every one of us is directly enlisted. Each and every one of us is now obliged to join together, to halt the spread of this disease, to protect our NHS, and to save many, many thousands of lives. I know that as they have in the past so many times, the people of this country will rise to that challenge, and we will come through it stronger than ever. We will beat the coronavirus, and we will beat it together. Therefore, I urge you at this moment of national emergency to stay at home, protect our NHS, and save lives. Thank you."
"939","Boris Johnson: (01:54);Good afternoon everybody and thank you for coming again. I want to thank Robert Jenrick the community secretary and of course Dr. Jenny Harris, the deputy chief medical officer. And I want to thank everybody in the country today for the whole effort that we are collectively making. I want to thank the amazing workers in the NHS, everybody working in social care, in every sector, food distribution, transport, you name it. Absolutely everybody who is keeping this country going today. And I want to thank everyone who is being forced of course to do something differently today. Everyone who didn’t visit their mum for mother’s day but FaceTime them, has rang them instead. Thank you for your restraint and for what you did. Everybody who was forced to close a pub or a restaurant or a gym or any other business, bar, they could have done fantastic business on a great day like this."
"940","Boris Johnson: (02:58);Thank you for your sacrifice. I know how tough it must be. And I can tell you once again that this government will be standing behind you, behind British business, behind British workers, employees, the self employed throughout this crisis. And the reason we’re taking these unprecedented steps both to prop up businesses, support business, support our economy and these preventative measures is of course that we have to slow the spread of the disease and to save thousands of lives. And today we’ve come to the stage of our plan that I advertised at the outset when we first set out the plan of the UK government. When we now have to take special steps to protect the particularly vulnerable. And you remember that I said the moment would come when we needed to shield those with serious conditions. There are probably about one and a half million in all. And in a minute Robert Jenrick will set out the plan in detail."
"941","Boris Johnson: (04:06);But this shielding will do more than any other single measure that we are setting out to save life. And that is what we want to do. Also to reduce infection and to slow the spread of the disease. And I want to say just a couple of other things. We have to do more to make sure that the existing measures that we are taking are having the effect that we want. So it’s crucial that people understand tomorrow that the schools are closed and tomorrow you shouldn’t send your child to school unless you’ve been identified as a key worker. And more generally in view of the way people have responded over the last few days to the measures that we have set out. I want to say a bit more about how we interact outdoors. And of course I want, of course I do, people to be able to go to the parks and open spaces and to enjoy themselves. It’s crucial for health, for mental and physical wellbeing, but please follow the advice."
"942","Boris Johnson: (05:20);And don’t think that fresh air in itself automatically provides some immunity. You have to stay two meters apart. You have to follow the social distancing advice. And even if you think that you are personally invulnerable, there are plenty of people that you can infect and whose lives will then be put at risk. And I say this now on Sunday afternoon, Sunday evening, and take this advice seriously. Follow it because it’s absolutely crucial. And as I’ve said throughout this process, we will keep the implementation of these measures under constant review. And yes, of course we will bring forward further measures if we think that is necessary."
"943","Boris Johnson: (06:15);So, always remember in following this advice. I know how difficult it is. But always remember that each and every one of us, you are doing your bit in following this advice. You’re doing your bit to slow the spread of the disease. And the more we collectively slow the spread, the more time we give the NHS to prepare, the more lives we will save, the faster we will get through this, and always remember we will get through this and we will beat it together."
"944","Boris Johnson: (06:50);So, next Robert Jenrick to outline the shielding measures that we’re going to be bringing forward in the next few days. Robert."
"945","Robert Jenrick: (07:00);Well, thank you prime minister and good afternoon. As a nation, we’re confronted with the need to make big changes and enormous sacrifices to our daily lives. And this is especially true today on mother’s day when many of us would want nothing more than to be at home with our loved ones in person. But in recent weeks, heroic workers in the NHS, in social care, our public services in local government and many others have been shouldering the country’s burden. And I think we owe it to them and to the most vulnerable in society to stay at home, to protect the NHS, and by doing this, to save lives. And as the prime minister said, our response from the outset to the virus has been guided by scientific evidence. And our action plan set out the interventions that would be required to be deployed at the right time. And so today we have to go further and shield the most clinically vulnerable people to help save their lives. Following the chief medical officer’s guidance, the NHS has identified up to one and a half million people in England who face the highest risk of being hospitalized by the virus. The NHS will be contacting these people in the coming days urging them to stay at home for a period of at least 12 weeks. I know that many people will want to know whether this applies to them. This will include people who are living with severe respiratory conditions, specific cancers such as of the blood or bone marrow, those who received organ transplants and some though not all of those receiving certain types of immunosuppressant drug treatments. The full list of conditions is now online at gov.uk/coronavirus."
"946","Robert Jenrick: (09:07);Now, I don’t underestimate what we’re asking of people. It will be tough, but if you are one of these people, I want to reassure you on behalf of the government that you’re not alone you. We will be with you throughout to support you. And let me set out what we’re doing and how it’s going to work. This week, the NHS will contact people by letter identified as being of higher risk of severe illness from coronavirus. This will also be followed up where possible by text and by phone call. We’ll be asking these people not to leave home at all to avoid face to face contact for 12 weeks or to protect themselves. I know people will worry about what this means for family members and for carers, for those without family and friends and neighbors close by. They’ll worry about how they’ll be able to receive medicines and essential supplies. And I know people will feel anxious about supporting their mental health as well as their physical health. So let me address those concerns."
"947","Robert Jenrick: (10:22);Others in the household will not be required to adopt these protective shielding measures for themselves. However, they must follow the public health England guidance on social distancing. Carers, both formal and informal can continue to visit, but again, they must follow the additional measures set out by public health England. For people who do not have support in place around them, who don’t have a network of family and friends close by, we will be creating a network of local hubs covering the whole country. This will require a major national effort in a very short period of time. Medicines will be delivered by community pharmacists. Groceries, and essential household items will be delivered by local councils and food distributors working with supermarkets to ensure that nobody needs to worry about getting the food and essential items that they’ll need. These parcels will be left on the doorstep."
"948","Robert Jenrick: (11:32);The government, the food industry, community pharmacists, local councils, and emergency services are working round the clock to get this scheme off the ground. Members of the armed forces already supporting this effort. Including some of the finest military planners in the world. The prime minister and I are very grateful to everybody who’s been involved and will be involved playing their part in making this happen. I know that many people watching at home will want to volunteer-"
"949","Robert Jenrick: (12:03);I know that many people watching at home will want to volunteer once the service is established. There will be opportunities and everybody can contribute in different ways. In every city, in every town and village, there’s a huge amount of work to be done and each of us has the power to do it. We need to remember our neighbors when we shop, we need to pick up the phone for a chat with loved ones. We need to display small acts of kindness, of thoughtfulness, of love and compassion."
"950","Robert Jenrick: (12:37);This will be a very worrying time for people with these health conditions. But whilst more people will be required to be by themselves at home and that’s difficult, let’s guarantee that they are never alone. And when all of this is done, that we emerge as better neighbors to each other, as stronger communities and that we are all proud of the part that we played in this effort. Thank you."
"951","Boris Johnson: (13:09);Thanks Robert. Jenny, is there anything you want to add?"
"952","Jenny: (13:11);I think perhaps just to add three things, I’m sure there’ll be some questions and I’m happy to answer those. I think first of all, just to highlight, this is a hugely complex task clinically to identify these individuals. Clearly we’re asking them to take themselves out of society for 12 weeks and that is no small ask and the measures that you’ve just heard recognize that difficult balance. In doing that, we have worked with the Royal College of General Practitioners, with NHS digital, with the medical rural colleges and with secondary care clinicians as well."
"953","Jenny: (13:46);And I just want to offer my thanks to them and they will continue to work with us over the next week or two while we refine the individual lists. I think the second point was just to note that for any of the public listing who might be in this group, because we want to be as inclusive as possible, we may actually slightly overestimate the number of individuals and there will be opportunity to discuss in due course their individual conditions going forward."
"954","Jenny: (14:17);So it is possible that an individual might, for example, receive a letter which has been digitally constructed because that is the quickest way to identify individuals. But we recognize also that the person at the end of the digital number is an individual living their lives and their condition changes on a regular basis. So it may be that somebody will receive a letter from the clinic as well. This is part of the plan to ensure that we contact all of those who need to be in this group."
"955","Jenny: (14:47);And then I think the final point I just wanted to make is whilst we’re asking these individuals to be isolated very firmly, many of them have very, very complex conditions or they not be in this group. And I just want to assure them that the normal services which they have from conditions or from other care systems will continue. And on an individual basis, they will either receive care at home through more virtual means, where that’s appropriate or arrangements will be made to bring them safely into clinical areas where they can be managed. So they should not worry that their care will continue. Thank you."
"956","Boris Johnson: (15:25);Thanks very much. Jenny. Let’s go to some questions now please. Vicki Young, BBC."
"957","Vicki Young: (15:32);Prime minister, you’ve said that we’re two to three weeks behind Italy in a newspaper article and that we need to make a national collective effort to stop the NHS being overwhelmed. At the moment that you’re still advising people to follow these measures rather than imposing them and I just wondered what evidence you’re basing that on given that it’s clear that some people aren’t listening. And just a quick question on the courts, they’re still going to be open tomorrow. Why is that?"
"958","Boris Johnson: (16:00);First on the courts quickly, Vicki. Many courts are already using video trials using a remote technology to do their business, but we’re keeping that under constant review. And on your general point about where we are in the balance of prohibition and allowing people to enjoy themselves outside. Let’s be absolute here, we’ve already taken some very, very draconian steps. We’ve closed the schools where we’ve closed a huge swath of the UK economy, bars, pubs, restaurants, theaters, gyms, and so on."
"959","Boris Johnson: (16:37);A huge quantity of our normal daily life has been totally transformed. It is very important for people’s mental and physical wellbeing that they should be able to get out and exercise if they possibly can. And many, many people do not have access, let’s face it, to private green space where they can do that. And that’s why parks, open spaces are so absolutely crucial for our country and for our society. But when we do that, we have to do it responsibly."
"960","Boris Johnson: (17:11);And so our message to people, the message that I want to get over tonight, because we’ve all seen how people have been enjoying themselves over a beautiful weekend. My message is, you’ve got to do this in line with the advice. You’ve got to follow the social distancing rule. Keep two meters apart. Otherwise, if you don’t do it responsibility, people don’t exercise responsibly in the parks and green spaces then Vicki as you suggest, there is going to be no doubt that we will have to bring forward further measures and we are certainly keeping that under constant review. Sam Coates, Sky."
"961","Sam Coates: (17:51);Sam Coates, Sky News. Robert Jenrick, you’re going to be asking a one and a half million people to do something completely unprecedented. I just want to ask a little bit about the practicalities of what you’re talking about. First of all, are you saying that there is a government guarantee, local government, national government that anybody who needs food and needs medicine will be supplied it in this group?"
"962","Sam Coates: (18:14);What can people expect? Will they get a telephone number to call when they get this letter? Who do they let know that they’ve run out of things? How will it work on a practical level and are you relying on the state or are you relying on effectively the big society which risks gaps opening up? Prime minister, I am confused by government guidance. I want to focus in on one example again, which is playgrounds."
"963","Sam Coates: (18:40);So Sadiq Khan says, don’t go out unless absolutely necessary. You got a stay at home on your podium there. The community secretary on the telly this morning said you can go to playgrounds providing children distance themselves from one another. Have you ever taken a child to a playground and successfully convinced a five-year-old to stay two meters away from another five-year-old on a piece of equipment?"
"964","Sam Coates: (19:07);Isn’t there a reason why Ireland closed their playgrounds? And doesn’t this show how people are taking mixed messages away from what you’re saying? And deputy chief medical officer, the graphs showing that the UK has more deaths at this stage than Italy are terrifying. Is there anything that you can say for people looking at those numbers and worrying?"
"965","Boris Johnson: (19:34);You’ll go."
"966","Robert Jenrick: (19:34);Yeah, prime minister. Well, the NHS will be writing to 1.5 million people. These letters should start to land on individuals’ doormats from Tuesday of this coming week. The letter will give a website and a phone number and those will be live by the time the individuals receive the letters. They’ll be able to use those services to alert us if they feel they don’t have family, friends, neighbors and existing support network to help them to get the medicines, the food and other supplies that they need."
"967","Robert Jenrick: (20:07);We imagine a very large number of people will have already the support network around them. This service is specifically designed to step in for those people who don’t have that, who are isolated and who will need our support as a government and as a society. We’re going to then be working with local councils who’ve already set up their hubs with the support of the armed forces to ensure this a very well organized mission logistically, and then we’re working with supermarkets and national food distributors to get the product, the food and supplies to their homes."
"968","Robert Jenrick: (20:40);And as I say, we hope that we’ll be having the first parcels arriving towards the end of next week if individuals need them to that timetable. I don’t underestimate how difficult this is as a challenge. Nobody’s tried to do this before and so it is going take time and we hope that people will bear with us and this will be an iterative process. The first food parcels will inevitably be fairly generic, although we will take obviously account to people’s medical and dietary requirements. In time, we hope to refine this into a more sophisticated product which is better for people and better responds to their individual needs."
"969","Boris Johnson: (21:18);Thanks Robert. And just Sam, remember while we’ve been trying to listen as absolutely scrupulously to the scientific and medical devices and what they’ve always said so far is that the health benefits for the whole of society of keeping the parks open and the playgrounds open if we possibly can, outweigh the epidemiological value of closing them. But of course, looking at the way people behave, at the way they are responding, we keep that under constant constant review."
"970","Boris Johnson: (21:55);And if people can’t make use of parks and playgrounds responsibly, you make a very good point about kids. But if they can’t do it in a way that observes the two meter rule, then of course we’re going to have to look at further measures. And the general principle should be that we should all, as far as we possibly can, stay home, protect our NHS and thereby save lives."
"971","Jenny: (22:27);So responding to your comments about the number of deaths, I mean, obviously any death is a sad event and it’s really difficult for us to, I think, contemplate the fact that we will have many more in this country just as we have seen in other countries. We are expecting that. The actions today particularly are focused precisely on avoiding those additional deaths. That is the main purpose of the shielding task. Not the reduction in numbers, but the reduction in deaths."
"972","Jenny: (22:58);So I think it makes it even more important that we’re taking this action. But I think there is a general count, which I’ve alluded to before in expectation about numbers. Because when you start counting deaths and the percentage, I’ve just done a very quick sum, while I was doing this about what our current position is. And I think if you calculated Italy’s case fatality rate now is about 10% and ours is four. Actually, we think overall, and we still think that it should be about 1%."
"973","Jenny: (23:27);And what both of these numbers demonstrate is that the numbers that you get change throughout the course of an epidemic and it changes very much on how you count the cases as well. So as you go through a very sharp rise in numbers, which we will see going forward, you have to be careful not to be comparing to precisely because at the moment in this country, we are counting the most significant disease and it will look as if our case rates, our death rates are actually increasing. We know that is what will happen. So it’s…"
"974","Jenny: (24:03);Right, so we’re actually increasing. We know that is what will happen. So it’s really just a reminder to say we will look back in due course sadly and see the true number of people who have died from coronavirus, but a direct comparison with another country and against individual numbers is something that we should be very cautious of as we go through the epidemic."
"975","Boris Johnson: (24:22);Thanks, Jenny. Jess Savage, ITV. Jess."
"976","Jess Savage: (24:25);Hello, thank you Prime Minister. Thank you. In speaking about social distancing and the two meter rule that you’ve spoken about, it’s very obvious from a lot of the images that we’re seeing across this weekend that a lot of people are not adhering to that. And you’ve spoken about further measures potentially being introduced. Could you explain to us what you think those further measures might be and when you would consider Implementing them?"
"977","Jess Savage: (24:52);And also ITV News has heard from one doctor who says that her hospital is already running out of ventilators and that people as young as in their 30s and 40s are waiting to get into intensive care and that she fears they may in fact die before they’re treated. So do you believe there are enough ventilators? And how fast are hospitals going to get more?"
"978","Boris Johnson: (25:15);Well, first of all, Jess, on ventilators, we have, we think, a good supply at the moment, but we need to get far, far more. You’re absolutely right. And that’s why there’s a huge national effort to equip ourselves, not just with ventilators, but with all the testing kits, the reagents, all the stuff that we’re going to need to beat this disease and we will. But I’ll ask Jenny to say a bit more about the particular hospital that you mentioned and the threat that was… I’m not aware of that particular issue."
"979","Boris Johnson: (25:50);On social distancing and the further measures that we may bring in. Well, I don’t think you need to use your imagination very much to see where we might have to go. And we will think about this very, very actively in the next 24 hours. We need to think about the measures that we’ve seen elsewhere, other countries that are being forced to bring in restrictions on people’s movements all together."
"980","Boris Johnson: (26:16);Now, as I say, I don’t want to do that because I’ve tried to explain the public health benefits, the benefits to people’s mental and physical wellbeing, in the sense that you can go out and it’s so important that pleasure and that ability is preserved, but it can only really be preserved if everybody acts responsibly and conforms with those principles of staying apart from one another in social distancing. I know it’s hard, but that’s the best way forward. If we can’t do that, then yep. I’m afraid we’re going to have to bring forward tougher measures. But Jenny, do you want to say something particularity about the ventilators? Because, I’m not-"
"981","Jenny: (27:00);Yes. I wasn’t actually going to refer specifically to a hospital, but I think just to say, so I think we’re all very aware that London currently, and a few other places, are starting to see very significant rises. We knew this would happen. It’s not what we want to happen, but we know that will happen. So the flexing of the system is designed to manage some of these bumps, if you like, where we get a high throughput of patients requiring ventilation."
"982","Jenny: (27:27);We monitor beds all the time. The data I have here says that in England, only 12% of adult critical care beds are currently occupied with COVID patients. That will change drastically as we go through the epidemic. But I’m also aware that all hospitals have been asked to step up their training. So on a personal basis, I have a junior doctor in my family, I know she was doing ventilator training on Friday. So there are a number of approaches to which, if we’re looking at what we might say was a standard ventilator bed, what we, if you were in a hospital, you would see routinely is that that is the capacity. There are flex plans sitting behind that to boost them using additional support. So I think we are not in a position where the country at the moment does not have sufficient ventilator capacity."
"983","Boris Johnson: (28:18);Thank you. There we’re working very hard to gt it, to massively to increase it. Be of no doubt about that. Chris Smith, the Times."
"984","Chris Smith: (28:29);Thank you. Firstly, to Dr. Harris, on the shielding plans. How confident can we be that the NHS is going to identify the right people [inaudible 00:28:39] databases are not sophisticated enough to do this? A lot people are going to fall through the net or be wired unnecessarily. And also what thought has been given the demands you’re placing on people, isolating themselves for an open ended period of time, that the mental health toll of this is not itself going to be quite dangerous for them?"
"985","Chris Smith: (28:55);And to the Prime Minister, you said we’re two weeks behind Italy, two weeks ago tomorrow, Italy imposed a lockdown. You’ve hinted today that you are thinking of that, but given where we are in the epidemic, if not now, then when?"
"986","Jenny: (29:07);[crosstalk 00:29:11]. Shall I start?"
"987","Boris Johnson: (29:12);Let me just say on, again, just taking Jenny’s earlier points about the difficulties of comparison between countries, but what we are trying to do is to push down on that growth curve and to get our NHS ready. What we don’t know is the effect that the measures we have already taken, we don’t know at this stage whether the measures we took 10 days ago, a week ago, so on, whether their starting to have an effect. And that’s the thing that’s incalculable at the moment. But we can’t obviously take any risks with that."
"988","Boris Johnson: (29:57);And when you say if not now, when is the moment? The answer is always to be guided by the science. And there’s a point that I think people intuitively understand about the timing of these measures. You’ve got to impose these interventions in the spread of the epidemic, at the moment when they can have the maximum effect. And after all, when the epidemic is hardly spreading at all, that’s not the moment to impose curfews and prohibitions on movement and so on and so on. You’ve got to wait until, alas, until it’s the right moment to do it. And that’s always been how we’ve been guided."
"989","Boris Johnson: (30:39);So for instance, in the measure that we’re announcing today on shielding, I think I made it clear right at the beginning, if you were there at the beginning, that we wouldn’t bring in shielding, which is the moment of maximum protection, and as you say psychologically quite taxing for elderly people, we wouldn’t bring that moment in until it coincided with their moment of maximum exposure to the disease. So you try and make the two things coincide."
"990","Boris Johnson: (31:10);And we will do absolutely everything in accordance with the advice that we get from Sage, from the CMO, from the CSA, about when our measures can have the maximum impact in stopping the spread of the disease. But basically what people need to understand today, is that that best bet to stop the spreading of the disease, protect our NHS, save lives, is stay at home if you possibly can. Stay at home if you possibly can."
"991","Jenny: (31:43);I’ll work in reverse if that’s all right. I think you mentioned the mental health issues, which are actually were recognized, as the Prime Minister said, if we’re asking people to stay away broadly from others for 12 weeks, that’s quite a large ask of people. It is obviously for their own protection and many of them will be able to self identify, but I’ll come back to that. For mental health, the letter that they will receive will direct them to Every Mind Matters and to the NHS Mental Health and Wellbeing Websites."
"992","Jenny: (32:12);Now we recognize that a number of people, these are people of all ages. Obviously people perhaps if they’re older will not be as familiar with that and that’s exactly the purpose of the hubs to ensure that there is a safety net behind so that if somebody has psychological needs as well as a general daily living needs or a clinical need, they have a support system."
"993","Jenny: (32:34);And I suspect what is likely to happen is local authorities know their communities really well. They know where their vulnerable individuals are, for whatever it be, whether it be clinical need or a social one and they’ll make that connection and the individual will be able to support. Some will need very little support at all. They’ll have families who can help them. But clearly it’s the most vulnerable that we need to. So that is very well recognized. It’s written within the guidance and it will come through the hubs."
"994","Jenny: (33:04);On the issue of identification. You are right, it is a hugely complex task. These diseases are not common. 1.5 million sounds a large number, but it’s actually a very small proportion of the population and they are spread across a number of different clinical specialties. So we have approached it by three or four different routes."
"995","Jenny: (33:25);So the first one is, as I said, through a digital route, but we absolutely recognize that that will not pick up, for example, every individual with a condition who is having a particular immunosuppressive treatment [inaudible 00:33:39] being provided maybe not by their GP but by a hospital specialist."
"996","Jenny: (33:43);So we’ve gone down four different routes, one through that digital element, one through the clinical reference groups who do much of these specialized health service commissioning work, one through the trust and the medical role colleges, and then finally there is a catch all at the end of it which is in a couple of weeks if you have not had contact that way, then you can always raise it with your GP yourself."
"997","Jenny: (34:09);We’re not keen for people to do that initially. We’re pretty sure we will get most of those people, or they will identify themselves and clearly those GPS are working really hard on the front line at the moment. So there is a catchall at the end of it and the general practitioner is perfectly entitled to raise the issue for any of his patients, his or her patients, that they think are in that category. So hopefully we will catch everyone."
"998","Jenny: (34:35);I would also just like to say, of course, this is not a treatment that we’re trying to give them. What we’re actually saying is do what we’ve asked you to do, all of the things we’ve said, but just do them very tightly. So in the interim phase, if they just follow the social distancing policy tightly, that’s effectively what we’re asking them to do."
"999","Boris Johnson: (34:55);Thanks, Jenny. Larissa Brown, Daily Mail."
"1000","Larissa Brown: (34:58);Thank you. Prime Minister, people aren’t acting responsibly. So when are you going to get tougher and bring in the police and Mr.-"
"1001","Boris Johnson: (35:07);Bring in the police?"
"1002","Larissa Brown: (35:08);Yes. You’ve talked about curfew, so could you talk about what the police could do and when. Mr. [Jimmerick 00:11:13], People that aren’t on the list, if they’re still worried, can they contact and make use of these community hubs? And Dr. Harris, can you talk a bit about the dangers of being outside and if you can contract the virus whilst you’re walking outside and should over 70s be going on strolls in the evening or should they be staying at home? Thank you."
"1003","Boris Johnson: (35:33);Thanks. Well, I really repeat the answer I’ve given. I say as firmly, as strongly as I can to everybody that in going outside now, in taking exercise and enjoying themselves, enjoying yourselves out of doors, you’ve got to take account of the medical advice. You’ve got to observe social distancing. And Larissa, yes, you’re absolutely right, and I’ve said it several times now this afternoon, if people can’t…"
"1004","Boris Johnson: (36:01);I’ve said it several times now, this afternoon, if people can’t do that, won’t do that, don’t do that, then yes, of course we’re going to have to bring in tougher measures. And we don’t want to do that, of course we don’t, but that may well be necessary."
"1005","Robert Jenrick: (36:16);Well, if I may answer your question as well, of course, as you heard from Jenny Allie, no system is full safe. There may be some individuals who have not been caught by the various process that we’ve been through, although, because we hope that isn’t the case. If there are people who feel that they fall into that category, they can contact their GP or they can contact their local hub once that’s established. But for all the reasons that Jenny set out, we don’t encourage people to do that today because we don’t want to put an unnecessary burden on GP surgeries and their phone lines."
"1006","Robert Jenrick: (36:49);There’s also another group of people who are otherwise vulnerable who will be self isolating or staying at home in the weeks and months ahead, and those individuals may not be on these lists because they may not have a specific clinical reason to be concerned for and for within the shielding initiative that we’re launching today, but nonetheless they may be vulnerable, they may need support, they needed that in many of their medicines and food brought to them. And for them the hubs will absolutely be there to support them, as well all sorts of other volunteering efforts that we’re encouraging as a government and which are already taking off in most parts of the country."
"1007","Boris Johnson: (37:29);Thanks Robert. Last question from … Oh sorry."
"1008","Jenny: (37:34);So I think you asked the question about 70s and over and going outside. So number one, if the 70 and over are in the shielded group, they should not, we’re saying very, very strongly they’re stay at home, which is very much an enclosed group, which is why it’s such a big thing to ask people to do. If you are 70 and over and are therefore more vulnerable because of your age or perhaps an underlying condition with your age, we are encouraging you to stay at home. We are asking everybody, but this group particularly, to cut right down on their social contacts. The principal running along this and the principle of staying at home is reduce the number of social contacts that you have. So, that applies to this group as well and we’re asking people in the general vulnerable group, the elderly people included in that to do that."
"1009","Jenny: (38:21);However, as we’ve heard with a number of these other areas, there is a real balance point here. What we do not want to find is that we grow mental health problems or we grow other physical problems because of such a strict imposition, which is exactly the point that the Prime Minister’s making. So, I think the real point here is we keep discussing but just to put the science behind it, the virus doesn’t last well outside for all sorts of reasons around temperature, UV light, and everything else. So,actually an outdoor environment compared with an indoor one is generally a safer one. But the difficulty is if people are congregating outside or coming together. So, a reasonably fit 70 year old who has been cooped up because he’s safely isolating in a home for a number of times and wants to go for a bit of fresh air and does so at a distance of two meters from somebody else, will no doubt boost his mental health until full able then to tuck himself away perhaps for the next 23 and a half hours quite safely and reduce the total number of his social contacts. So, it is the principles underlying this which are really important and I think it’s those ones that we should be trying to get out to the public and you know through that encouraging people who currently are congregating, they are dangerous. They are making the outside environment unavailable to others who need it. And it’s those individuals that we would ask not to congregate outside and to ensure that everybody can have just a little bit of safe space when they need it."
"1010","Boris Johnson: (40:00);Thank you. That’s very, very clear. Charles Haim is 10:00."
"1011","Charles Haim: (40:07);One question to you, Prime Minister, is the issue of gatherings and what size is a gathering? The you should restrict and ban and particularly as regarding private gatherings where you might have a group of students who’ve got together for a party, how are you going to deal with that? Are you going to make that illegal?"
"1012","Charles Haim: (40:25);And then Mr. Jendrick, just very simple, straightforward question on the packages. Is the food going to be free and how will they actually order it? Just the precise details of how that process works."
"1013","Boris Johnson: (40:41);On the technicalities of the size of gathering, if you don’t mind, I’m going to ask Jenny to answer."
"1014","Jenny: (40:47);So, I think as we’ve said in a number of these briefings before actually, the very large gatherings, you are still surrounded by a smallish group of individuals and this is that proximity, which is the problem, but it is the social gathering as well, usually with a large one most before and after. So there’s the pub, the restaurant, the getting in the buses in an enclosed environment."
"1015","Jenny: (41:09);In actual fact, the epidemiology suggests that it is quite smallish gatherings, which are actually the most difficult. So, somewhere around 10, 12, 15, 20, that sort of size. So, in fact, the reason we’ve probably all not had good Mother’s Days is because having a family gathering where people are quite intimate with each other in terms of the social distancing, it’s very difficult to be in a family group when you know each other very well and stay two meters apart. So, the fact they are probably the riskier gatherings rather than the large ones."
"1016","Charles Haim: (41:43);Will you ban them?"
"1017","Jenny: (41:45);Well, we have already asked that people do not go that way. So it was exactly the same message as the outside, which is, it’s very difficult if you are, if you’re living in a family unit, you’re in the same household. But it’s very difficult to actually do that. And throughout all of this, we have tried to put in the science, put in epidemiological methods, but at the end of the day it relies on the public to actually make it work. It’s not something that government or medicine can do. We actually all have to do it."
"1018","Boris Johnson: (42:16);And wash your hands."
"1019","Jenny: (42:16);And wash your …"
"1020","Boris Johnson: (42:16);Robert."
"1021","Robert Jenrick: (42:20);Yes. And on your questions to me, the letters that will go out will provide a whole range of advice, but they’ll also highlight this issue of whether you wish to be part of the shielding arrangement for medicines and for food. You’ll be directed then either to a website which will be applicable for some people, obviously there will be others who won’t want to use that route. There’ll be a phone number that you can call and on either of those routes you’ll be able to state your preferences, whether you don’t have family, friends, neighbors close by, people who could support you, whether you need this service and at that point you’ll be asked what your preferences would be in terms of dietary requirements, medical conditions and so on, which will then guide us to provide the parcel to you."
"1022","Robert Jenrick: (43:05);In the first instance, the product’s going to be free paid for by the Exchequer for simplicity. If over time we’re able to refine it into a more sophisticated offer, which is more tailored to individual’s needs and we’re working with supermarkets to see if that is possible in time, then it may be a different arrangement. But to begin with it’s going to be free to ensure that people who really need it get the supplies as soon as possible."
"1023","Boris Johnson: (43:30);Thanks. I just want to wrap up because we’re going back over this debate that we’ve been having about about public space, open space and how to handle it. Because I think I want get back to the point I was making at the very beginning, which is I want to fight the vast majority of people who are really behaving incredibly responsibly and following the guidance and the advice on social distancing."
"1024","Boris Johnson: (43:53);And the difficulty, of course, is that what’s happening is that some people have either through heedlessness or whatever are not making it easy for us because they are, as Jenny says, congregating in a way that is likely to spread the disease. So, we have to think very carefully now about how we take steps to correct that. And as I’ve said, we will be thinking actively over the next few days. But the best thing that everybody can do, if you’re going outside, observe social distancing. Stay two meters apart. It’s not such a difficult thing. Do it. And we say generally to people, “Stay at home.” That is the best way to protect the NHS. That is the best way. If you possibly can stay at home, that’s the best way to save potentially many, many thousands of lives."
"1025","Boris Johnson: (44:49);And the more we comply now, with what Jenny and others have been saying, then the faster we will beat it and the faster we will get through it. That’s not the first time you’ve heard me say it, but it is absolutely true."
"1026","Boris Johnson: (45:07);Thank you all very much. See you next time. Thank you."
"1027","Boris Johnson: (09:10);Good afternoon. Thank you for joining us for today’s daily briefing on coronavirus. I’d like to update you all on the government’s plan to defeat the virus and on the latest developments. I am joined once again by our chief medical officer, professor Chris Whitty and the chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance. From the very beginning of this crisis, I followed the advice of our world leading scientists to defeat coronavirus by taking the right measures at the right time."
"1028","Boris Johnson: (09:49);What everybody needs to recognize is that our NHS, like any world class health service, has any limited numbers of doctors, nurses, and specialist equipment. So the more people who become sick at any one time, the harder it is for the NHS to cope. And so it’s vital to delay the spread of the disease and reduce the number of people needing hospital treatment at any one time. That’s why we’ve given the clear instruction that people must stay at home unless they have one of the reasons we’ve set out. With your help, we will slow the spread of the disease. I want to thank everyone who’s been following the clear rules that we set out on Monday. And I want to thank everyone in the NHS, the frontline of the fight against coronavirus, and of course all our public services, our teachers and our school staff, the transport workers, police officers, everyone who’s keeping this country going. But I also want to offer a special thank you-"
"1029","Boris Johnson: (11:03);But I also want to offer a special thank you to everyone how has now volunteered to help the NHS. When we launched the appeal last night, we hoped to get 250,000 volunteers over a few days. But I can tell you that in just 24 hours, 405,000 people have responded to the call. They will be driving medicines from pharmacies to patients. They will be bringing patients home from hospital. Very importantly, they’ll be making regular phone calls to check on and support people who are staying on their own at home. They will be absolutely crucial in the fight against this virus. That is already, in one day, as many volunteers as the population of Coventry. So to all of you and to all the former NHS staff who are coming back now into the service, I say thank you on behalf of the entire country."
"1030","Boris Johnson: (12:06);Now I want to take some questions. But, finally, I want to remind everyone of our core policy. Stay at home, protect the NHS, and save lives. Thank you. I think we’ll go straight to questions now. We are going to hear, first of all, I think from Laura Kuenssberg of the BBC. Laura are you there?"
"1031","Laura Kuenssberg: (12:35);Thank you, prime minister, yes. Prime minister, can you honestly say that the government is coping? There aren’t enough tests. People are struggling to make ends meet, and some people are being forced to go to work when they don’t feel that they are safe. Is that coping? Can I ask the medics as well, if we already have the kinds of numbers of tests that you would like to see, how much of a difference would it have made to your ability to fight the disease?"
"1032","Boris Johnson: (13:03);Well, first of all, Laura, on the tests, a huge national program of testing is being rolled out, but I’ll hand over to Patrick and to Chris to say a little bit more about testing and how we’re going to do it. But on the national effort to protect those whose jobs, whose livelihoods are threatened, I think everybody understands the challenge that the whole country now faces. But we have to get through this together, and we are getting through it together with an unprecedented program of support not just for businesses but for workers of all kinds across the country. Never in our history has the government put its arms around people in the way that we are doing now to help them get through this difficult time. Yes, it is absolutely true that the measures to support people in employment are exceptional and extraordinary. 80% of your salary, up to 2,500 pounds per month, we’re standing behind. We’re also, in the course of the next couple of days, you’ll be hearing more from Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, tomorrow about what we’re doing to help the self-employed. I think people do understand that the complexity of their working arrangements has been harder to come up with the right tailored program for the self-employed as well. But that is coming forward tomorrow."
"1033","Boris Johnson: (14:30);Yes, I do think that when you look at the sheer scale of what the government is doing to get this country through, to answer your correction directly, we will cope, and we are coping very well indeed under the most challenging possible circumstances. But the most important thing to enable us to get through it well together and to come out well together, as I think we can, as I know we can, is that we all follow the instructions that the government has given. Stay at home. Protect the NHS. That’s the way to save lives."
"1034","Boris Johnson: (15:09);But on testing, perhaps, Chris, would you like to say some more?"
"1035","Chris: (15:15);In terms of testing, there are a variety of different things you use testing for, some of which we have tests available for and have done throughout, some of which we do not. So I’m going to run through them because they’re different answers depending on which you’re talking about. Starting off with the antigen testing, which is testing for people who’ve currently got a disease, we initially were using that to help screen people who came from high-risk countries. When that ceased to be a sensible policy, we moved on to testing people in intensive cares and in hospitals, and we have sufficient tests for that at the moment. The system for that is working fine and is being scaled up. So that side of testing is in place and is working well. So if a patient gets as far as a hospital, we’re confident on the testing and on the scale up."
"1036","Chris: (16:00);The thing we would like to do next, which would certainly make a difference less to the disease but definitely to the NHS, is being able to test NHS and other critical workers who are self-isolating who currently are not being tested because we do not have sufficient testing. This is a global problem, because basically every country is wanting this new test for a disease that wasn’t actually being tested for anywhere up through three months ago. So everybody wants this. So there is a global shortage, and that’s a bottleneck for us. But the next priority is to get critical workers back to work or to say to them you have got this. So we definitely would like that, not to fight the disease, but to support the NHS."
"1037","Chris: (16:41);Once we have more testing than we need for that capacity, then we want to go out to test a much wider range of people with mild systems. Some people are already having it as part of our surveillance system, but we’d obviously like to go wider. But that’s the prioritization list. Then separately there are other tests which we will want to have, which are not yet absolutely evaluated, but are going to be critical once we’ve got them that can tell someone whether they have had the virus. So this is the antibody test. You can’t do that in the first few days after someone’s had a fever, but after a few weeks, possibly a short as one week. That will allow us to be able to say to NHS workers, to other workers, look, you’ve had this infection at least for the short time and possibly for quite a long time. We think it’s likely you’re protected against this, and you can go back to work and be confident, if you get another cough and fever, that is not going to be Coronavirus. But that’s the sort of technology that’s quite close, and it’s being evaluated this week, but [inaudible 00:17:41] there. On the first one, our bottleneck is largely global shortages, which we are obviously doing our level best to free up, because it would make it a lot better for us to be able to test health care workers now, for sure."
"1038","Male: (17:53);Patrick [crosstalk 00:17:54]"
"1039","Boris Johnson: (17:55);… testing is crucial. It’s absolutely crucial, and, yes, we need more of it, as Chris has said. The other thing that’s going to be important with the antibody test is to be able to work out how many people have had the disease asymptomatically. That’s going to be important to understand what to do next. These tests are crucially important. We need more of them. People are working very hard to get them in place."
"1040","Chris: (18:19);The one thing, finally, that I think is the one thing that’s worse than no test is a bad test. So telling someone inaccurately either they have had it or have not had it can lead to dangerous mistakes being made. So we do not want to go ahead with testing until we’re confident of the technology."
"1041","Boris Johnson: (18:36);That is so important. If it means a delay to get there, that delay is worth having, because that is, as Chris said … If you tell someone it’s okay, you haven’t got it, and they have got it, that is not a good position to be in. If you tell somebody they’re immune from it and they’re not, that is not a good position to be in. So we must make sure that we get the quality of this absolutely right."
"1042","Boris Johnson: (19:00);[inaudible 00:19:00] Patrick, on the numbers of people who have the disease asymptomatically, there was a study I saw quoted from some Oxford academics saying that as many as 50% may have had it asymptomatically. I think a lot of people have seen that story. How do you evaluate that at this stage?"
"1043","Patrick: (19:21);We simply don’t know at the moment. That’s why the antibody test is so important. So there are estimates that up to 80% or more of people in Wuhan weren’t detected. There are estimates that, of those who are positive, so that’s a small percentage of the population who tested positive, quite a number of them were asymptomatic in a town in Italy. But we don’t know at the general population level, and that’s why it’s so important to get this test in place."
"1044","Boris Johnson: (19:49);Thank you. Beth Rigby, Sky News."
"1045","Beth Rigby: (19:53);Thank you, prime minister, just a couple of questions. You said earlier you’re not closing down the whole of the UK colony. But other countries such as Italy, a country you said we were two or three weeks behind, have now introduced a very strict lockdown. Wouldn’t you save more lives if you did keep all nonessential workers at home? If I may, a question on testing. [inaudible 00:20:23] England has said today 3.5 million testing kits could be available to show whether you’ve had Coronavirus or not as early as next week. In practical terms, who will get those tests and how? In broader terms, how transformational do you think this will be in terms of fighting Coronavirus? Thank you."
"1046","Boris Johnson: (20:48);Well, thanks very much, Beth. In terms of the epidemiological value of what we’re doing in asking people to stay at home, I think possibly the most thing I could say is just repeat the basic message, which is that if you can stay at home, then you overwhelmingly should stay at home. That’s our most important advice. If it’s absolutely necessary for you to go to work, to a place of work, then it’s vital that your employer follows the rules as set out by Public Health England and ensures that you have the protections that you need, and the proper rules on social distancing do apply. But I wonder whether I could ask [inaudible 00:21:35] comment on the value of what we’re doing in terms of the … Beth asked, reasonably enough, about not closing down the whole UK colony, which we’re not doing. But we’re simply asking people to stay at home. Is there anything you want to say?"
"1047","Chris: (21:49);Well, I can certainly give an answer. Patrick might want to add to this. The first thing is the modeling … Every country does this slightly differently, and every country has got a slightly different epidemic pattern at this point in time, so that’s entirely reasonable."
"1048","Chris: (22:03);An epidemic pattern at this point in time. So that’s entirely reasonable and all of us of course are dealing with a new infection and therefore are having to take the science from quite a low base very fast in terms of the advice we give."
"1049","Chris: (22:13);But the modeling we have done here, which Patrick can talk about in more detail, was based on the idea that quite a lot of people would have to go to work as part of this and that is the basis on which the modeling is done. But we absolutely need people to avoid anything that is in any way discretionary, where people can choose whether they do it or not. So that’s why all other social activity, all other mixing between households has to stop, is to allow these absolutely essential things to continue. So that’s the basis of doing this."
"1050","Chris: (22:48);There is an additional reason, which is we have to remember that many of the things we have to do are going to be have to be sustained for a reasonably long period of time and broadly the more difficult you make it for people, the less easy it is to sustain. So there is some degree of trade off between those two things."
"1051","Chris: (23:07);In terms of testing I want to be really clear about what we can and can’t do. We certainly have acquired, for the UK, a lot of tests, but I would go back to my previous answer, and Patrick’s previous answer, the key thing for us to do is now to evaluate are these tests accurate enough to be used by the general public? And if the answer is they’re all incredibly accurate, then we will work out the most quick and effective way to release these."
"1052","Chris: (23:38);If it turned out none of them were accurate, we would not wish to release any of them because inaccurate testing is something which we really should be avoiding. So the thing we are going to do really fast is the evaluation and then based on that evaluation we will be able to decide what to do next."
"1053","Chris: (23:54);I don’t know whether perhaps you want to add anything on the modeling side?"
"1054","Patrick: (23:57);The only thing I’d reemphasize is what we’re trying to do is to break the transmission of virus from one household to another. We’re trying to break the transmission of virus in society. To do that, we need to keep separate. And the clearest way to keep separate is to stay in your house, and that’s why that’s the core message."
"1055","Patrick: (24:19);There are people who have to go to work in some jobs who cannot stay in their house all day and the most obvious one is in the NHS, but there are others as well. And then it’s important to break the transmission, where possible, to stay two meters apart. And that’s what we need to keep focusing on. We’re trying to stop the transmission of this virus between people, between households, and break that chain."
"1056","Chris: (24:40);In terms of whether it’s transformational in the long run. The answer is it will completely transform what we can do. In the short run, this antibody test, which is the one that were talking about with these big numbers, I think is less important than the other one, the antigen test I was talking about earlier in a previous answer."
"1057","Boris Johnson: (24:59);Thanks. So I should have said more clearly perhaps at the beginning that you should stay at home, except for those very few exceptions. I just spell them out again, if people have forgotten. Unless you need to get essential supplies, Beth, unless your on a specific medical mission or helping the vulnerable, or unless you’re taking daily exercise. And remember the daily exercise is very important, provided you stay away from other people. Gary Gibbon, Channel 4."
"1058","Gary Gibbon: (25:33);Prime Minister, the frontline staff and the National Health Service and in working in social care couldn’t be clearer. They want that test on COVID-19 that tells them whether they got it, they want it now."
"1059","Gary Gibbon: (25:44);In the House of Commons, again and again today, you said they’re going to get it as soon as possible. People might have a little bit more confidence about where we’re going as a country if you could answer this question mainly, how did we come to be so woefully behind other countries that have checked, evaluated, and deployed tests in much, much bigger numbers already?"
"1060","Boris Johnson: (26:07);Well, thanks, thanks Gary. I repeat the answer that I gave earlier in the House of commons. We will do it as soon as possible. We are massively ramping up our testing programs, buying in huge numbers of tests to see whether you’ve had it already, but also pushing forward very fast on testing people to see whether they currently have it."
"1061","Boris Johnson: (26:31);The antigen or the antibody tests that have been described. And as, Matt Hancock, the Health Secretary has said, we’re going up from 5,000 to 10,000 tests per day, to 25,000 and so on. Hopefully very soon up to 250,000 a day."
"1062","Boris Johnson: (26:50);But to answer your question about the types of tests that we have, the differences that you see in between the UK’s provision for testing and other countries, I think it probably would be most helpful if I again pass to Chris and to Patrick to explain. Chris."
"1063","Chris: (27:08);I think that in terms of the testing, so first of all, why the delays in the UK system? There are multiple components of these tests, including the chemicals that make them up, the swabs that you use, and there are shortages along many of these supply chains, essentially because every country in the world is simultaneously wanting this new thing."
"1064","Chris: (27:28);Some components of it are old, but the scale of this is something which is obviously occurred at extraordinary speed and that’s just a practical reality. And I think anyone who understands how supply chains work and the huge demand for this there is globally would understand that."
"1065","Chris: (27:43);I think comparing different countries is actually quite difficult. Different countries have got different testing strategies, but you’re certainly right that what we need to do is look at those countries that have actually got more testing than us and work out how to do it the way they’re doing it as best we can in our own system using our own testing systems. That’s something we’re doing very actively at the moment."
"1066","Chris: (28:04);Clearly we’re doing a lot of testing here though. For example, looking at the numbers we’ve done so far, 97,000 tests already conducted. It’s not that there is no testing going on, what we need, clearly, is to be able to scale it up."
"1067","Patrick: (28:18);Nothing to add."
"1068","Boris Johnson: (28:19);I would just add to that that we’ve done many more tests, not that this is a competition, we’ve done many more tests than most other European countries. And you’re totally right, Gary, that the priority should be, and will be, getting those tests to our frontline staff in the NHS. And as I said, we are going to do that as fast as we possibly can. Francis Elliott, of The Times."
"1069","Francis Elliott: (28:50);Yes. Hello, Public Health England this morning suggested that these tests, these antibiotic tests, if they work, could be available from online stores and from Boots. Can we just explain, and I understand that they may not work, but if they do work, how are you going to prioritize who gets those tests or is it just going to be a scramble, and how do you verify the test results? Presumably these will be critically important about whether you can work with vulnerable people or even begin to go back to normal work perhaps. And lastly, how do you collect the results so that you can model what’s happening elsewhere? It seems that you do self testing and this is obviously a very important result."
"1070","Boris Johnson: (29:37);Chris."
"1071","Chris: (29:38);So what we’ll do is, once we’re confident of which tests work and how many therefore we’ve got available to use, there’s a hierarchy of things that we need to do. We need to start off by answering that critical question that Patrick was talking about. What proportion of people get this without any symptoms? Because that has big implications for the way we then manage this. That’s a very early priority. Then we need to help make sure we can get NHS workers tested to make sure we can work out who is immune, or almost certainly immune, to this infection and who isn’t, and we will basically go out in a graded way from there."
"1072","Chris: (30:16);I do not think, and I want to be clear, that this is something we’ll suddenly be ordering on the internet next week. We need to go through the evaluation, then the first critical uses, and then spread it out from that point of view, and we need to do that in a systematic way."
"1073","Patrick: (30:30);And your point, which is right, the first thing we need to do is to collect the information and to understand this epidemic. So it’s not 3.5 million free for all with no data being collected. We need to answer the critical questions and need to make sure the right people get the tests first in order to allow workers to go back, and the other points that Chris has made."
"1074","Boris Johnson: (30:52);Thanks very much, Patrick. Sam Lister, the State Express."
"1075","Laura Kuenssberg: (30:58);Thank you. Prime Minister, your critics have suggested that you’ve had to be dragged into taking the action you announced on Monday and that you’ve allowed the virus to spread. Do you regret not going further sooner? And also, if I may, you suggested in the Commons earlier that you might introduce new laws to deal with profiteering. Are you angry at retailers and individuals who are trying to exploit this crisis? And how far are you prepared to go? Could it include jail terms?"
"1076","Boris Johnson: (31:30);Thanks very much, Sam. Well, on the first, very important question, as I said right at the beginning, and indeed right at the beginning of this crisis, we were going to do the right measures at the right time, and not according to political dictac, but according to the best scientific and medical advice in the world."
"1077","Boris Johnson: (31:52);There are good reasons for wanting to tackle an epidemic strictly in accordance with the scientific advisor. That is what we have done and I continue to believe that that is the right approach for this country, the right approach for the UK. We have the best scientific advice in the world and we will continue to follow it."
"1078","Boris Johnson: (32:10);On your other important question about profiteering, I dislike it very much and I do not want to see people profiteering, people exploiting people’s need, at a critical time, a national emergency. So we are indeed looking very carefully at what is going on. The Competition and Markets Authority already has various powers that it may use, but we are looking at the legislative framework to see what it may be necessary to do to prevent profiteering, just as happened in wartime many, many years ago."
"1079","Boris Johnson: (32:47);Is there anything you want to add on any of that?"
"1080","Patrick: (32:53);The most important measures got put in place first and that’s the right thing to do. Washing hands was critical. Isolating, household isolation, get these things, and now we’ve got a very…"
"1081","Patrick: (33:03);… household isolation, get these things and now we’ve got a very strong package in. The one thing I would say, it’s incredibly important that we stick to it. It’s incredibly important that people understand that this is about breaking the transmission of the virus and we can only do that if we all do it."
"1082","Boris Johnson: (33:18);That is absolutely right. Thank you. David Hughes, last question. David Hughes, PA."
"1083","David Hughes: (33:25);Prime Minister, by tomorrow it will already be too late for many self-employed people who have already found themselves in hardship or being forced to risk their health and that of others by continuing to work. What’s your message to them, and will you apologize for the delay in providing them with the kind of support that employed workers have already been given? And to the CMO, what’s the current occupation rate of critical care beds in England? Can you be confident that the measures announced over the past week will prevent that capacity being overwhelmed?"
"1084","Boris Johnson: (33:53);Well, thanks very much David. I’ll just really repeat what I’ve said before, I think the government has moved with extraordinary speed to support and prop up the whole of the economy of this country, putting our arms around workers of all kinds to the best extent that we possibly can. Yes, of course it was easier to move furthest and fastest with employees because their PAYE details are of course available. It’s been more complex, as you can understand, to support the self-employed because there are many different arrangements that they have and it’s been tricky to work out a package that will address the needs of as many people as possible. But that is being done. It’s being done at incredible speed. [inaudible 00:01:44] we’ll be announcing a package tomorrow."
"1085","Boris Johnson: (34:47);I genuinely don’t think there’s been a time in our history in the last century, certainly, when the government of this country has put its arms around so many people to get us through a very tough time. We will get through it and we will get through it together."
"1086","Chris: (35:05);On critical care, so at this point in time, critical cares, as of today, there is not enormous pressure on critical cares compared to a bad or even normal winter day. For example, in NHS today, but we expect the demand for critical care beds to continue to rise over the next two weeks. That is entirely what we expect to happen and that is what will happen over that time. Clearly the demand is going to go up from the coronavirus. Now because of the actions that people are taking and provided everybody continues to keep the social-distancing measures, which are very difficult in terms of staying within households only doing absolutely essential things apart from exercise, that will help to pull down the demand a very long way. That is how people in the general public, all of us, are helping to protect the NHS."
"1087","Chris: (35:58);At the same time, the NHS is increasing supply by either a combination of pushing out in time things which can be postponed and increasing the critical bed care and particularly the ventilated bed capacity over the next weeks. This is going to be a close-run thing. We all know that. Anybody who looks around the world can see this is going to be difficult for every health system, but the measures that have been announced for the general public, which all of us have to do, if the NHS is to get through this without exceeding its capacity, and the work by the fantastic work by the NHS and my colleagues in the NHS to increase supply, that is the way that we will narrow this gap to the smallest possible gap over the next three weeks."
"1088","Chris: (36:48);We do think that if everybody sticks to the staying in your household, and that’s absolutely essential, this gap will be probably managed well by the NHS. But we cannot guarantee that, and nobody who is sensible would wish to guarantee that. But we think that is what we are planning for and that is what we intend to happen."
"1089","Boris Johnson: (37:10);Right. Well, thanks, everybody, very much. Thanks to our friends in the media for their questions. Thank you to you all for tuning in and watching this. I hope that it has been useful. We’ll be back tomorrow or there’ll be another update tomorrow here from Downing Street on the fight against coronavirus. But remember the essentials: We will beat this. We will beat it together. We will do it by protecting our NHS, staying at home, and that is how we will save lives."
"1090","Boris Johnson: (37:46);Thanks, everybody."
"1091","Boris Johnson: (37:46);(silence)"
"1092","Boris Johnson: (00:00);Today I am joined by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Rishi Sunak, and Jenny Harries, Deputy Chief Medical Officer. Yesterday I set out the ambition of this government to turn the tide against coronavirus within three months. And I want to repeat that determination today."
"1093","Boris Johnson: (00:17);We’re going to do it with testing. We’re going to do it with new medicines, and new digital technology that will help us to see the disease as it is transmitted, and thereby, by eliminating it, to stamp it out. And above all, now we’re going to defeat this disease with a huge national effort to slow the spread by reducing unnecessary social contact."
"1094","Boris Johnson: (00:43);And I want to thank everybody for following the guidance we issued on Monday: To stay at home for seven days if you think you have the symptoms, for 14 days if anyone in your household has either of the symptoms, a new continuous cough or a high temperature. To avoid pubs, bars, clubs and restaurants. To work from home, if at all possible. Keep washing your hands. And I know it’s been tough. And I know it has been inconvenient. But these actions that we’re all taking together are helping to take the strain off our NHS."
"1095","Boris Johnson: (01:20);And bit by bit, day by day, by your actions, your restraint and your sacrifice, we are putting this country in a better and stronger position, where we will be able to save literally thousands of lives, of people of all ages, people who don’t deserve to die now. People whose lives can, must, and will be saved."
"1096","Boris Johnson: (01:48);And as we take these actions together and as we make these sacrifices, we can see the impact on the real economy. Already, fantastic British companies, already under huge strain, big and small. Workers who are finding that their jobs are under threat or going, through new fault of their own. And to all of them, we in government say: We will stand by you. And I say that to companies, remember our joint objective: to beat this virus. And we will do everything in our power to help."
"1097","Boris Johnson: (02:25);And in just a minute, Rishi is going to explain how we’re going to help workers of all kinds to get through this crisis, supporting you directly in a way that government has never done before, in addition to the package that we’ve already set out for business."
"1098","Boris Johnson: (02:46);And of course these measures are intended, these steps that we’re taking are intended, to be temporary. And of course I am confident that, in time, the UK economy is going to bounce back. Of course it is. But I must be absolutely clear with you: The speed of our eventual recovery depends entirely on our ability, our collective ability, to get on top of the virus now. And that means we have to take the next steps, on scientific advice and following our plan, we are strengthening the measures announced on Monday, which you will remember."
"1099","Boris Johnson: (03:27);And already, people have made a huge effort to comply with those measures for avoiding unnecessary social contact. But we need now to push down further on that curve of transmission between us."
"1100","Boris Johnson: (03:41);And so following agreement between all the formations of the United Kingdom, all the devolved administrations, we are collectively telling, telling cafés, pubs, bars, and restaurants to close tonight as soon as they reasonably can, and not to open tomorrow. Though to be clear, they can continue to provide takeout services. We’re also telling nightclubs, theaters, cinemas, gyms and leisure centers to close on the same timescale."
"1101","Boris Johnson: (04:23);Now, these are places where people come together, and indeed the whole purpose, in many cases, of these businesses is to bring people together. But the sad thing is, I’m afraid, today for now, at least physically, we need to keep people apart."
"1102","Boris Johnson: (04:43);And I want to stress that we will review the situation each month, to see if we can relax any of these measures. And listening to what I have just said, some people may of course be tempted to go out tonight. And I say to you, please don’t. You may think that you’re invincible, but there is no guarantee that you will get mild symptoms, and you can still be a carrier of the disease and pass it on to others. So that’s why, as far as possible, we want you to stay at home. That’s how we can protect our NHS and save lives."
"1103","Boris Johnson: (05:27);To repeat, I know how difficult this is, and how it seems to go against the freedom-loving instincts of the British people. And I also know how much, right now, workers and business deserve the financial reassurance that we are giving them. But we will get through this. We will get through it together, and we will beat this virus."
"1104","Boris Johnson: (05:55);And to ram that point home: The more effectively we follow the advice that we are given, the faster this country will stage both a medical and an economic recovery in full."
"1105","Boris Johnson: (06:11);Thank you all very much. I’m going to pass now to Rishi, who’s going to explain the financial support for workers."
"1106","Rishi Sunak: (06:19);Thank you, Prime Minister. Good afternoon. The economic intervention that I’m announcing today is unprecedented in the history of the British state. Combined with our previous announcements on public services and business support, our planned economic response will be one of the most comprehensive in the world."
"1107","Rishi Sunak: (06:39);Let me speak directly to people’s concerns: I know that people are worried about losing their jobs, about not being able to pay the rent or mortgage. About not having enough set by for food and bills. I know that some people in the last few days have already lost their jobs. To all those at home right now, anxious about the days ahead, I say this: You will not face this alone. But getting through this will require a collective national effort, with a role for everyone to play. People, businesses, government. It’s on all of us to meet our commitment to that effort."
"1108","Rishi Sunak: (07:25);I am today announcing a combination of measures unprecedented for a government of this nation. Our plan for people’s jobs and incomes will protect people’s jobs, offer more generous support to those who are without employment, strengthen the safety net for those who work for themselves, and help people stay in their homes."
"1109","Rishi Sunak: (07:49);The first part of our plan is to protect people’s jobs. This week, the government has taken unprecedented steps to fight the coronavirus. We have closed schools. We have told people to stay at home to prevent the spread of infection. We are now closing shops, restaurants, bars. Those steps are necessary to save lives, but we don’t do this lightly. We know these measures will have a significant economic impact. I have a responsibility to make sure that we protect, as far as possible, people’s jobs and incomes."
"1110","Rishi Sunak: (08:28);Today, I can announce that for the first time in our history, the government is going to step in and help to pay people’s wages. We’re setting up a new Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme. Any employer in the country, small or large, charitable or nonprofit, will be eligible for this scheme."
"1111","Rishi Sunak: (08:51);Employers will be able to contact HMRC for a grant to cover most of the wages of people who are not working, but are furloughed and kept on payroll, rather than being laid off. Government grants will cover 80% of the salary of retained workers, up to a total of £2,500 a month. That’s just above the median income. And of course, employers can top up salaries further if they choose to. That means workers in any part of the UK can retain their job, even if their employer can not afford to pay them, and be paid at least 80% of their salary."
"1112","Rishi Sunak: (09:34);The Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme will cover the cost of wages backdated to March 1st and will be open initially for at least three months, and I will extend the scheme for longer if necessary. I am placing no limit on the amount of funding available for the scheme. We will pay grants to support as many jobs as necessary."
"1113","Rishi Sunak: (10:00);And can I put on record my thanks to the Trades Union Congress, the CBI, and other business groups for our constructive conversations? We said we would stand together with the British people, and we meant it. We have never had a scheme in our country like this before. And we’re having to build our systems from scratch."
"1114","Rishi Sunak: (10:22);I can assure you that HMRC are working night and day to get the scheme up and running. And we expect the first grants to be paid within weeks, and we’re aiming to get it done before the end of April. But I know that many businesses are hurting now. I’ve already taken extraordinary measures to make cash available to businesses through loans, grants and guarantees."
"1115","Rishi Sunak: (10:47);I can announce today that the Coronavirus Business Interruption Loan Scheme will not be interest free, as previously planned, for six months. It will now be interest free for 12 months. And thanks to the enormous efforts of our critical financial services sector, those loans will now be available starting on Monday. And I will announce further measures next week, on top of those the Governor and I have already taken to ensure that larger and medium sized businesses can also access the credit they need."
"1116","Rishi Sunak: (11:20);I’m also announcing today further cash flow support through the cash tax system. To help businesses pay people and keep them in work, I’m deferring the next quarter of VAT payments. That means no business will pay any VAT from now until the end of June, and you will have until the end of the financial year to repay those bills. That is a direct injection of over £30 billion of cash to businesses, equivalent to 1.5% of GDP."
"1117","Rishi Sunak: (11:57);Let me speak directly to businesses: I know it’s incredibly difficult out there. We in government are doing everything we can to support you. We’re paying people’s wages up to 80% so someone can be furloughed rather than laid off to protect their jobs. We’re deferring over £30 billion of taxes until the end of the financial year. We’re lending unlimited sums of money interest free for 12 months. We’re abolishing business rates altogether this year if you’re in hospitality, retail and leisure. We’re providing cash grants of £25,000 for small business properties. The government is doing its best to stand behind you, and I am asking you to do your best to stand behind our workers."
"1118","Rishi Sunak: (12:47);We are launching in the coming days a major national advertising campaign to communicate the available business support for businesses and people. Please look very carefully at that support before making any decisions to lay people off. It’s on all of us."
"1119","Rishi Sunak: (13:07);We are starting a great national effort to protect jobs. But the truth is, we are already seeing job losses. And there may be more to come. I cannot promise you that no one will face hardship in the weeks ahead. So we will also act to protect you if the worst happens."
"1120","Rishi Sunak: (13:30);To strengthen the safety net, I’m increasing today the Universal Credit standard allowance for the next 12 months by £1,000 a year. For the next 12 months, I’m increasing the Working Tax Credit basic element by the same amount as well. Together these measures will benefit over 4 million of our most vulnerable households."
"1121","Rishi Sunak: (13:56);And I’m strengthening the safety net for self-employed people too, by suspending the minimum income floor for everyone affected by the economic impacts of coronavirus. That means self-employed people can now access, in full, Universal Credit at a rate equivalent to Statutory Sick Pay for employees. Taken together, I’m announcing nearly £7 billion of extra support through the welfare system to strengthen the safety net and protect people’s incomes. And to support the self-employed through the tax system, I’m also announcing today that the next self-assessment payments will be deferred to January 2021."
"1122","Rishi Sunak: (14:41);As well as keeping people in work and supporting those who lose their jobs or work for themselves, our Plan for Jobs and Incomes will help keep a roof over your head. We’ve acted already to make sure homeowners can get a three-month mortgage holiday if they need it. I’m announcing today nearly £1 billion of support for renters, by increasing the generosity of housing benefit and Universal Credit, so that the Local Housing Allowance will cover at least 30% of market rents in your area."
"1123","Rishi Sunak: (15:16);The actions I’ve taken today represent an unprecedented economic intervention to support the jobs and incomes of the British people. A new, comprehensive job retention scheme. And a significantly strengthened safety net. Unprecedented measures, for unprecedented times."
"1124","Rishi Sunak: (15:39);Let me close with one final observation: Now, more than at any time in our history, we will be judged by our capacity for compassion. Our ability to come through this won’t just be down to what government or businesses do, but by the individual acts of kindness that we show each other. The small business who does everything they can not to lay off their staff. The student who does a shop for their elderly neighbor. The retired nurse who volunteers to cover some shifts in their local hospital. When this is over, and it will be over, we want to look back on this moment and remember the many small acts of kindness done by us and to us. We want to look back on this time and remember how we thought first of others and acted with decency. We want to look back on this time and remember how, in the face of a generation-defining moment, we undertook a collective national effort, and we stood together. It’s on all of us. Thank you."
"1125","Boris Johnson: (16:53);Thank you very much, Rishi. Jenny, is there anything you want to say at this stage?"
"1126","Jenny Harries: (16:58);[crosstalk 00:16:58] have the chance to answer questions on anything [crosstalk 00:16:58] science."
"1127","Boris Johnson: (16:58);Okay, well, perhaps you can help us field the, any questions from the scientific and medical point of view, as they come. Can I go first to Alex Forsyth from the BBC?"
"1128","Alex Forsyth: (17:09);Prime Minister, thank you very much. The measures you’ve announced today will have a significant impact, not just on business, of course, but on people’s lives. Can you tell us, what has changed that’s made you introduce these measures now? How long, if you can, do you see these measures lasting, and how do you plan to enforce them? And Chancellor, if I may, you talk about unprecedented measures that you’re taking. How can you be sure that the tax and welfare system can cope to ensure that this support goes to those people who need it, and need it quickly? Thank you."
"1129","Boris Johnson: (17:39);Thanks. Well, Alex, what we’re doing today is really enforcing what we set out in the fourth part of our advice on Monday. I think people’ve made a huge effort in the last four or five days to comply. We saw big reductions in people attending some pubs, a lot of pubs across the country. A lot of effort was made by people to reduce unnecessary social contact, as we said. But it was becoming clear that in order to drive that curve down, to reduce the unnecessary social gatherings by 75%, which is what the science tells us we need to do to have an impact on that curve, then we need now to be making it absolutely clear that we’re going to enforce these closures. And so that’s the pubs, bars, clubs, and so on that I mentioned, in addition to gyms, leisure centers, and so on."
"1130","Boris Johnson: (18:39);Now, how are we going to enforce it? Well, clearly, there are licensing arrangements that will make it, I think, relatively simple to do, should that really be necessary. And we will enforce it strictly, but in reality, I think everybody can see the imperative of doing what is necessary, of protecting our NHS and saving lives. Rishi?"
"1131","Rishi Sunak: (19:09);Alex, you’re absolutely right to ask the question. I think when I was here earlier, I said it’s all very well, it’s easy for me to stand here and announce things, but I want to make sure that the help I’m announcing can get to the people that we want to benefit from it. And so that’s why, as we’ve thought about what we’re doing, there are various ways you can design job support schemes, and there are various ways that we can get extra money into our welfare system to strengthen the safety net. We have deliberately focused on scheme design and particular policies that we know are easy to operationalize quickly. And there are many ideas that people have about how to do all these things, and we’ve been looking through all of them."
"1132","Rishi Sunak: (19:50);But I will put on record my thanks to the staff at HMRC and the Department for Work and Pensions. They themselves will be under enormous operating pressure over the coming weeks and months, like all of us, and every business. So as I said, we specifically designed this scheme to work in a way that minimizes the operational complexity. And similarly, with the welfare interventions that we’ve made, we have deliberately picked those that are absolutely the easiest and most straightforward, and require the least manual intervention."
"1133","Boris Johnson: (20:19);Thanks, Rishi. Larisa Brown, Daily Mail."
"1134","Larisa Brown: (20:21);Thank you, Prime Minister. Could we get to a stage where NHS workers have to choose who to try and save because there aren’t enough ventilators? And also, it’s obviously Mother’s Day this Sunday. Are you urging people to stay away from their mothers? And will you be seeing yours? Thank you."
"1135","Boris Johnson: (20:42);On the first question, about clinical judgments, doctors in the NHS, clinicians in the NHS, already make very difficult judgements. But our objective, and the objective with this whole campaign, is to ensure that we flatten the curve, as we’ve been saying repeatedly over the last couple of weeks. We flatten the curve, but also that we lift up the line of NHS resilience and capabilities. That means there’s a massive effort going on right now to ensure that we do have enough ventilators, enough ICUs, to cope. And that is why it’s so vital that people follow the measures that we’ve outlined."
"1136","Boris Johnson: (21:23);And as for Mother’s Day: Look, I think my advice would be that people should really think very carefully about, irrespective of whether they are visiting their mothers, any elderly person who may be in a vulnerable group. It doesn’t matter whether they’re necessarily over 70. The issue is whether they are in one of the vulnerable groups. Think very carefully about the risk of transmission of the virus and follow the advice. Look at the medical advice. Our advice is that elderly people, people with serious underlying health conditions, people in the later stages of pregnancy, you have to be careful about the transmission of the virus. And I’m sure people will handle that advice accordingly."
"1137","Boris Johnson: (22:22);And I’m in regular contact with all members of my family, but I’ll be working very hard on Sunday, I can tell you that much. I’ll certainly be sending her my very best wishes and hope to get to see her."
"1138","Boris Johnson: (22:37);Shahid Khan, ITV."
"1139","Shahid Khan: (22:41);Prime Minister, there’s been an escalation in the measures that you have been recommending and advising, and now ordering. Are we going to get to a stage where there are further measures that you’d consider, including potentially limiting transport and movement of people around the country?"
"1140","Shahid Khan: (22:55);And to the Chancellor, if I may, will this wage protection scheme cover those on zero-hour contracts? If so, given that so many people on zero-hour contracts do not have a set salary every month, how will their wages be determined, and who will determine them?"
"1141","Boris Johnson: (23:10);Yeah, look, [inaudible 00:23:10], on transport, I don’t know whether you were here yesterday, transport is fundamental to our ability to deliver vital public services. I was pretty clear that we don’t want, for instance, to immobilize the Tube or our major transport networks. It’s just too important for the delivery of crucial public services."
"1142","Rishi Sunak: (23:34);Yes, and on those, everyone who’s covered by the scheme, it covers everybody who is on the PAYE system through a company. So we’re publishing detailed guidance shortly. But depending on your particular employment contract, it might be different depending on who you are. It covers zero-hours, covers a variety of different situations. But it may well be that you are on a PAYE scheme and have a set of regular earnings, and it will be covered, depending on your particular circumstance. I can’t generalize for every single person’s employment status, but in general, our desire here is to cover as broad a range of people as possible. We’ve wanted to make it as comprehensive a scheme as possible for those in employment, which is why we haven’t limited it by company, by sector, by size of business. We deliberately targeted it to do as economy-wide an intervention as we can."
"1143","Boris Johnson: (24:21);Sam Coates, Sky News."
"1144","Sam Coates: (24:23);Sam Coates, Sky News. Chancellor, you’ve announced an extraordinarily large package today. Do you have any sense of how much it’ll cost per month? And presumably it’ll be funded by borrowing, so can you guarantee that this package will be available month after month, up to maybe 18 months, which some of the scientific studies suggest might be the duration of what we’re facing?"
"1145","Sam Coates: (24:49);Jenny Harries, millions of children broke up today for the last time from school. Could you just be crystal clear about what children should and shouldn’t do, from Monday? Can they go to the park, go to the playground, have play dates with their friends? I know there’s a lot of confusion out there."
"1146","Sam Coates: (25:08);And Prime Minister, Sky News has talked to a senior emergency medicine consultant in a South London hospital today. He’s just warning about the dangers ahead. The fact that they’re not set up for the huge numbers of ventilators needed, the disbelief they feel at the queues outside the supermarket with peoples too close together, and calling for more lockdown, and warning that we could be in a situation worse than Italy, and upset at what they call the falsely-placed sense of optimism they see amongst some politicians. What is your message to that doctor?"
"1147","Boris Johnson: (25:41);[inaudible 00:00:25:40]."
"1148","Rishi Sunak: (25:41);Can I start, Sam? Yep. You’re right. It is a significant intervention. We’ve thought through that and our intention is to finance the package through the government’s normal debt management operations. As we’ve already announced, the treasury and the DMO, the Debt Management Office, are shortly to publish a comprehensive update to the gilt financing remit, and that will be done in April. And of course, the DMO, Treasury, and Bank of England are coordinating closely to support the functioning of the gilt markets, and we’re very confident that we can finance it in that way."
"1149","Jenny Harries: (26:13);So I’ve got a very simple answer to that. I think there should be some guidance published today from the Department for Education, which has had clinical and scientific input. The basic strand running through all of these measures is about social distancing and reducing the totality of our social interactions. That applies to children just as it does to the rest of us, but also there is a balance there between maintaining physical and mental wellbeing when we’re going through what will be, for all of us, quite a stressful period. So for children who are at home, a family or a household group usually has the same sort of exposure risk. So put nicely, that just means it’s okay for them to play together usually in their own home environment, kick a ball around in the garden if they have one. We’re not saying don’t go outside, but we are saying if you go outside, go in a way which reduces your social contact."
"1150","Jenny Harries: (27:04);So clearly for children there is a safety issue here, and a safeguarding one. We don’t want to suggest every small child should go off on a solitary walk across the park. That would not be a helpful public health measure. But certainly, with appropriate supervision, buddying children, for example, keeping two meters apart off for a bike ride together or something, that is absolutely fine. And in many ways, we would encourage that. But there are some simple principles, again, around that. Make sure you hang onto your own bike, your own equipment, or whatever. Wash your hands regularly. If you’ve got coughs and sneezes, obviously, use a tissue. All the things that we’ve been encouraging people to do. So very much we want children… The weather is getting better, we want children to be exercising. But to do so not in groups."
"1151","Jenny Harries: (27:50);And I think one of the issues is, where you have team games, for example, it’s not just the team game itself which can be problematic. So I would not encourage those. But the most important bit, also, is the social element around it. So if everybody piles up in shared cars, that’s not a good thing to do. And if everybody tried, they won’t be able to now, but if everybody tried to go to a café or restaurant afterwards, that would also not be a good thing to do. So exercising, fine. But cut right down on the social connections."
"1152","Boris Johnson: (28:21);Yeah, and Sam, just on your last question: I don’t think anybody in government could conceivably be accused of underestimating the scale of the crisis this country now faces. It’s perfectly obvious, when you look at the gradient of the disease, that we have a real threat now to our country, to the ability of our NHS to manage it. And unless we get this right, we are going to see thousands of lives lost, as I say, needlessly. But we have an opportunity, as I’ve said, to get on top of it. To make sure that we turn the tide. And to do that, we’ve got to follow the advice that we’re giving. And that’s why we’re taking the measures that we are today. That’s why it’s absolutely vital that people do avoid unnecessary social contact. And that’s why we’re closing the pubs and the bars and the theaters and so on, because we need now to stop the velocity of circulation of this disease."
"1153","Boris Johnson: (29:16);And I’ve made it very clear to the country that we will take exceptional measures to do that. But we are also taking exceptional measures to help and to compensate those who are adversely economically affected by what we have to do as a country. And I think everybody understands the two halves of this. Everybody understands that people in employment, businesses, workers, everybody is making a huge sacrifice now to protect the lives of people who are vulnerable to coronavirus. And it’s absolutely vital and right that the government should stand behind those businesses and those workers as well, and that’s what we’re doing today."
"1154","Boris Johnson: (29:57);And on your second point about supermarkets, look, I answered this yesterday, and I make the same point again: I think people should shop reasonably and considerately. We do have fantastic supply chains. We’re having another meeting with the supermarkets tomorrow. I am chairing another meeting with the supermarkets tomorrow. And they’re very confident they can get the stuff from farm to fork, so everybody should just shop reasonably and be considerate of others."
"1155","Boris Johnson: (30:29);Francis Elliott, The Times."
"1156","Francis Elliott: (30:34);Thank you. Mr. Sunak, you mentioned shops. Can you clear up whether shops are to be forced to close? It didn’t appear on the list that was mentioned by the Prime Minister."
"1157","Francis Elliott: (30:45);And Jenny Harries, could you update us on how we are doing with protective personal equipment? That’s obviously something that’s deeply concerning."
"1158","Francis Elliott: (30:55);And Mr. Johnson, could you just say, in very simple terms, what you think about people who are ignoring the advice? I mean, it seems you sort of resisted the temptation yesterday, or the invitation, to say that they were behaving immoral. Do you not think that if people aren’t following these advice, that they are actually being immoral?"
"1159","Boris Johnson: (31:16);Rishi, on the shops."
"1160","Rishi Sunak: (31:17);Yes. No, just very specifically, the list that the Prime Minister gave and Jenny outlined is a specific list. I was just talking in more general terms. But there’s a very specific category of places where social contact happens, which is significant to the spread of the virus, which Jenny has spoken to and can speak to again. But that, I meant very specifically the places that she had, and the Prime Minister had, referred to already."
"1161","Jenny Harries: (31:39);So yes. So it’s very much those areas where people are gathering for social reasons. So in many ways, they’re almost encouraging the spread of disease, simply by virtue of those establishments. So restaurants, cafés, bars, are where you’re meeting. But we recognize how difficult this is for people’s lives. So having takeout facilities, or the opportunity to convert some of those, means that food supplies will continue. And that applies very much to supermarkets, obviously, and other shops. So it’s leisure centers. If you are exercising outside, that is fine, but inside is not appropriate. So the leisure centers will close. So it’s areas you can imagine where you’re going purposefully for social gathering which are the ones that we’re most keen to reduce the social interactions."
"1162","Boris Johnson: (32:26);Yeah, sorry. PPE."
"1163","Jenny Harries: (32:29);Sorry, PPE, yes. So PPE. So the country has a perfectly adequate supply of personal protective equipment, PPE, at the moment. That encompasses quite a wide range of different gowns, masks, gloves, all sorts of things."
"1164","Jenny Harries: (32:43);There have been, I think, some differential deliveries, if you like, in some areas, which has caused a degree of concern recently. That is completely resolved now. And in fact, what we’ve done in the last 36 hours is set up an entirely separate PPE oversight and supply chain, which allows hospitals… but also we need to be very clear there are other workers in the care system who are equally important… and will allow that appropriate management to ensure that the supply and demand is there. And I think we do need to be really clear, this is an unprecedented health event for this country. And so it is not unlikely, in many ways, that we will have found a pressure in the early days where an individual hospital, individual trust, or an organization has had to suddenly ramp up its demand. But that supply is there. And running alongside that is a call out to arms, a bit like ventilators and testing as well, to make sure we are exploring every avenue and opportunity for keeping those supplies coming through."
"1165","Boris Johnson: (33:47);Yeah. Francis, on your moral point: I don’t want to get into moral name-calling and so on and so forth. But I do accept that what we’re doing is extraordinary. We’re taking away the ancient, inalienable right of free-born people of the United Kingdom to go to the pub. And I can understand how people feel about that."
"1166","Boris Johnson: (34:09);But I say to people who do go against the advice that we’re getting, the very clear advice that we’re getting from our medical and scientific experts: You’re not only putting your own life, the lives of your family, at risk, you’re endangering the community. And you’re making it more difficult for us to get on and protect the NHS and save lives. And if you comply, if people comply as I say, then we will not only save lives, thousands of lives, but we’ll come out of this thing all the faster."
"1167","Boris Johnson: (34:40);Tom Newton Dunn, The Sun."
"1168","Tom Newton Dunn: (34:44);Thank you, Prime Minister. By closing pubs, restaurants, clubs, et cetera, is it not a considerable risk that what you’ll therefore do immediately is push, maybe, many young people into their own homes? They’ll just have big parties. You’re not going to ban parties, or are you? And what is your advice to young people? Not to gather in groups of a hundred and drink the same amount behind closed doors?"
"1169","Tom Newton Dunn: (35:07);And Chancellor, if you don’t mind me asking, the one element of society affairs you missed out with all this is charities, the voluntary sector. Though you’re covering their wages, charity income is down 40% since they started this in only a couple of weeks. They’ve asked you for a bailout as well. Will you now consider that?"
"1170","Boris Johnson: (35:25);You can start. Tom."
"1171","Rishi Sunak: (35:28);Thank you. So in terms of support for the charity sector, the significant business rates relief schemes that we operated in the last or two will certainly benefit them, which will have direct cash flow benefit to them, and they are covered by today’s intervention, which I would underscore is significant. In terms of more support for voluntary and community groups, that’s something that I’m actively talking to the Secretary of State for Communities for, and especially as we try and look after the most vulnerable in our communities, it may well be that we should increase funding for local voluntary community groups to help with that. And that’s something I’d say we’re actively looking at."
"1172","Rishi Sunak: (36:08);But just to underline more broadly, the scheme that I’ve outlined today is unprecedented in scope and scale for a British government. And it is an enormous commitment by us to British jobs and British workers. This is going to be difficult, but we are with you through this. And we are doing absolutely everything we can to support your jobs and to support your incomes through this time."
"1173","Boris Johnson: (36:32);Yeah, and Tom, on your point about young people: Obviously we can’t forbid every form of socializing between human beings. Of course we’re not doing that. But on the other hand, what we are saying is that the risk is not just for young people. The risk is that they will become vectors of the disease for older relatives, with potentially fatal consequences. And we ask people to think about that. And that’s why we’re taking the decisive steps we’re taking in respect of places that actually invite people to socialize. That’s why we’ve issued the very strong advice that we have. And I really hope everybody takes it. I’m afraid we’re going to have to wrap up now, because we’ve got more things to go and weigh and do."
"1174","Boris Johnson: (37:23);But two important things that I hope you’ll take away from today, two important bits of news: Yes, we are telling pubs, bars, restaurants, clubs to close. Gyms, leisure centers, we’re telling them to close. And it’s a huge wrench to do that. Everybody understands that. It’s a huge wrench. And it’s heartbreaking to think of the businesses that will face difficulties as a result of the measures this country has had to take."
"1175","Boris Johnson: (37:53);But that is why we are also simultaneously announcing a quite exceptional package of support, and not just for businesses, but for individual workers. And our message to business is that we will stand behind you, and we hope that you will stand behind your workers."
"1176","Boris Johnson: (38:15);And to the country: This time, it is different. We all remember what happened in 2008. This time, we want to make sure, as we heal the economic damage that this is causing, that we put the people first. Thanks all very much."
"1177","Robert Jenrick: (00:00);… All the emergency services, the police, the fire service, the ambulance service, with local authorities and the NHS to lead communities through this challenging period. From Cornwall to Cumbria, we’ve embedded within each of these groups members of the armed forces, including some of the finest military planners in the world. These groups are planning the local response to the virus using their expertise, their judgment and their leadership to ensure a comprehensive, a coordinated, and a consistent response across the country. Now, one issue that they have been helping us to coordinate and about which I know there is a lot of concern is the provision of personal protection equipment. We simply cannot and should not ask people to be on the front line without the right protective equipment. We have a clear plan to ensure that those serving this country at this time have the right equipment. We’ve established a national supply distribution response team, and they’re supported now by members of the armed forces and other emergency services who are working around the clock to deliver the equipment to the people who need it most."
"1178","Robert Jenrick: (01:33);170 million masks, 42.8 million gloves, 13.7 million aprons, 182,000 gowns, almost 10 million items of cleaning equipment, and 2.3 million pairs of eye protectors, all delivered to 58,000 NHS trusts and healthcare settings, including GP surgeries, pharmacists and community providers. Every single GP practice, dental practice and community pharmacy has had a PPE delivery. All care homes, hospices and home care providers have or will shortly receive a delivery. To NHS and social care workers, all those who rely on this equipment and to their families and loved ones watching this afternoon, we understand. And we will not stop until we have got you the equipment that you need. Now, last weekend at this press conference, the prime minister and I explained why 1.5 million people who are extremely vulnerable to the virus due to the underlying health conditions needed to stay at home for a period of 12 weeks, and avoid face to face contact."
"1179","Robert Jenrick: (03:12);Since then, the NHS have written to almost a million of these people and outlined the steps that they need to take to protect themselves. We’ve also established a dedicated webpage on gov.uk which those in receipt of the letter should go to to let us know whether or not they need further assistance over the course of the next 12 weeks. There’s also a new phone number which is on the letter they have or will receive shortly. Now, if this applies to you, I know that you will find this a very worrying time. You’ll be thinking about how you can continue to access the medicine that you need, how you can get the food and other essential supplies that you rely on. If you don’t have family or friends or neighbors nearby who you can rely on, then the NHS will deliver your medicines through the community pharmacy network."
"1180","Robert Jenrick: (04:14);If you register online or using the phone service that we’ve set up letting us know that you need support, then we will deliver food and supplies to your doorstep. And this weekend I saw for myself firsthand the first deliveries being made. The packages included, cereal, fruit, tinned goods, teabags, biscuits, toiletries and other essentials. The first 50,000 will have been sent out by the end of this week, and we’re ramping up production to send out as many as are required for as long as it takes. If this applies to you, while you will now have to be at home for a prolonged period of time and that will be difficult, I want you to know that you are not alone. We’re here to support you for as long as you need us. We’ve all been hugely impressed by the commitment and the dedication of those working in social care in local councils delivering essential public services, like ensuring that the bins continue to get collected."
"1181","Robert Jenrick: (05:34);None more so than me as the secretary of state for local government. We all respect the 12,000 heroic former doctors and nurses and paramedics who have come back to work and being deployed this weekend. And I think we’ve all been moved by the number of people who’ve signed up to be one of the NHS voluntary responders. Today we can announce an extraordinary three quarters of a million people have signed up to do that. In every city, in every town, in every village there’s going to be work to be done, and in each of us there is the power to do it, and so please take part, please play your part, please consider your friends, your family, your neighbors when you’re shopping. Please call the elderly and support them. When this is done, and it will be done. We all want to be proud of the part that we’ve played together. Thank you very much. And now I will answer some questions from the media, and I think the first question today is from Simon Israel from Channel Four news. Good afternoon Simon."
"1182","Simon Israel: (06:58);Good afternoon minister. I have two questions. One for you and one for Dr. Paris. My question to you is 10 days ago the prime minister predicted the tide would be turned in 12 weeks. What’s the current forecast? And to Dr. Paris, I want to ask a message sent to staff today at King’s Hospital Trust said, and I quote, “The number of deaths being reported at Kings in national figures is below what they are experiencing.” This is not just Kings, there are a number of other trusts and the center has been made aware. Are … At what point are we being given accurate up to date figures on the numbers who have died?"
"1183","Robert Jenrick: (07:43);Well, thank you Simon. If I can begin before handing over to Jenny, nobody’s pretending that this will be over in a few weeks. But what the prime minister said in the past, and I will reiterate today, is that if we all play our part, if we all follow the very clear medical advice, then we can turn the tide of this virus. And at the heart of that is a very simple message, which is to stay at home. By doing so, protect the NHS and then save lives. If we follow that advice, then we can turn the tide, and the more we adhere to that advice, the more lives will be saved and the faster we’ll begin to do that. Jenny?"
"1184","Jenny Paris: (08:29);Thank you. So just picking up the point about the tide and the turning, I think this is an important message to get across to the public. As I said previously on a number of these interviews, this is a bit of a moving feast which is dependent on the actions that we take as individuals and collectively as a population. If we practice social distancing effectively, we will move the peak across, and that is a good thing because as we move it, it will drop. So we need to keep practicing. The data that we have the modeling going forward will suggest that in the time period which the … Sorry, the prime minister noted, which was 12 weeks, we would get on top of the virus, and that is exactly what I hope we will do. The proof of that will come in around two to three weeks."
"1185","Jenny Paris: (09:22);That is because our most constant figures, and we’ll come back to this in a moment, are the deaths, and the deaths follow the numbers of infections. And where it’s usually a two or three week time lag, and we also need a lag for the effectiveness of the intervention measures to come through. So what I keep saying frequently, and I’m sorry if I’m repetitive, is that we need to wait for two to three weeks to see what we have achieved collectively. And then the slope of that curve will start to indicate where a new peak will be. But we’re optimistic that that peak will be lower. So we need to keep looking at this, but it will be two to three weeks before we are-"
"1186","Jenny Paris: (10:03);We need to keep looking at this, but it will be two to three weeks before we are clear whether the peak has shifted across or not. I think that was the first question. The second one that you raised was around deaths. Clearly every death that we have is a really sad event. It involves the family and a lot of sadness. We have to make sure that when we’re reporting, the family is content and knows, and that all our data is absolutely accurate. For any event like this, whether it be COVID, whether it was Ebola, whatever it is, there is always a time lag for us to check and evaluate that the data across the system is linked. We do not want to be misreporting data and then having to correct it. The public would not have confidence if we were doing that, and as we have had sadly to register more deaths, that time period takes longer."
"1187","Jenny Paris: (10:55);I’m not aware of the communication from [inaudible 00:00:58]. It may be that that’s gone back into the NHS. What I can say is all of our data links up and there is a time lag, and for the reporting yesterday, it would have been the deaths reported the previous day. So it is inevitable that there will be a time lag. This is not an issue of transparency. It’s an issue of ensuring that all of those family that need to know and all the parts of the system can consolidate the information and ensure it’s accurate for the public."
"1188","Robert Jenrick: (11:28);Thank you, Jenny. I think that’s very clear. I’ll take the next question from [Pool 00:11:31] brand from ITV. Pool."
"1189","Speaker 2: (11:31);Yeah. Thank you. Firstly to the deputy chief medical officer. Originally we were told that the lockdown measures would be for three weeks. Is it safe to now assume that they will go on for much longer than that? To the secretary of state, when will the government be making that reassessment so that people can plan their lives?"
"1190","Jenny Paris: (11:52);Shall I start with that one? I think if you look back what the prime minister said was he would review in three weeks and that actually links back to the point that I’ve just made. It would be foolish of us to start something one day and assume that it was going to have an impact the next. For all of us, it’s taken quite some time to get used to this new way of living to ensure that we practice social distancing and we stick to that. As a population we have evidence that we are getting better at that as we go through. People are staying at home more as they should, they’re using transport less. They’re only going to work when it’s essential. So those measures have now been in place solidly for a week or two. We need another couple of weeks to see that through, and as I’ve just mentioned earlier, the issue of the three weeks is for us to review where we are and see if we’ve had an impact jointly on the slope of that curve."
"1191","Jenny Paris: (12:44);I think to make it clear to the public, if we are successful, we will have squashed the top of that curve, which is brilliant, but we must not then suddenly revert to our normal way of living. That would be quite dangerous. If we stop then all of our efforts will be wasted and we could potentially see a second peak. Over time, probably over the next six months we will have a three week review. We will see where we’re going. We need to keep that lid on and then gradually we will be able to hopefully adjust some of the social distancing measures and gradually get us all back to normal. I think three weeks for review, two or three months to see whether we’ve really squashed it, but about three to six months ideally and lots of uncertainty in that. But then to see at which point we can actually get back to normal, and it is plausible that it could go further than that. We just need to wait to see how successful we’ve been. Of course the bottom line is as we always say, keep practicing good social distancing. Because we will manage it quicker and better between us."
"1192","Robert Jenrick: (13:50);Well absolutely. From the outset of this crisis we drew up the measures that could be implemented, and then on expert medical advice, we have chosen the right time for this country to implement them. We’ve taken a number of very significant steps on social distancing over the course of the last 10 days, as Jenny has just said. It is the nature of this virus that it takes a couple of weeks to see how effective each one of those in turn has been. When we’ve implemented them, we’ve said that we will review these in three weeks or so and when the prime minister made his announcement on Monday bringing to a close nonessential shops and encouraging us all to stay at home to restrict what we do in our leisure time, he made clear that we would review these steps at Easter on the basis of the expert medical opinion and that’s exactly what we intend to do."
"1193","Robert Jenrick: (14:48);The evidence that I have seen suggests, as Jenny has said, that the public generally complying. I’ve spoken to a number of chief constables from across the country over the course of the last few days and business owners are behaving very responsibly. Of course, there are always small numbers of people who aren’t, but in general the public is doing the right thing. The more we comply, the more we will be able to protect the NHS to save people’s lives, and the faster we’ll turn the tide on the virus."
"1194","Robert Jenrick: (15:20);If I could take the next question from David Shukman, who’s from the BBC. David, good afternoon."
"1195","David Shukman: (15:28);Thank you very much indeed. The two questions, if I May, first Mr. Jenrick to you, the prime minister in his letter talks about leveling with the public about things getting worse before they get better. What do you think the coming week is going to look like, and then a question for Dr. Harris. We’ve had confirmation of the very sad death of an ENT surgeon, Amged El-Hawrani. What do you think that says? What message does that send to NHS staff on the front line?"
"1196","Robert Jenrick: (15:58);Well. Thank you very much David. Can I also give my deepest sympathies to the family of Dr. El-Hawrani? We heard the news just a few moments ago that he had very sadly passed away. With respect to your question, the prime minister has now written, or will be over the course of this week, to all the households in this country setting out very clearly the task that is before all of us. We see on the news the difficult scenes in other European countries, like Italy for example. The deaths that we are reporting daily and these press conferences are very sobering. Every death is a tragedy. We don’t want to see any unnecessary death."
"1197","Robert Jenrick: (16:42);So what the prime minister has said to all of us in that letter is that we all have the power to influence the course of events with respect to this virus. If we want to protect people’s lives, if we want to help the NHS to be able to have the capacity to continue to perform the good quality public service that we all want it to do throughout the course of the virus, then we need to take heed of the medical advice. We do need to stay at home. By doing that, we’ll protect the NHS and we’ll help to save people’s lives. This is on all of us. We all have a responsibility to protect each other. We just need to follow the advice in the days and weeks ahead. Jenny."
"1198","Jenny Paris: (17:29);Okay. Well, clearly you will not expect me as a medical professional to comment on an individual case. That would be normal practice, but equally as a medical professional, of course, I’m very saddened by the fact that one of our professional colleagues has passed away. It clearly is a worrying event. It’s worrying for the nation because it’s another death in our statistics. It’s another loss to a family, and it will be a loss to an NHS family as well. I think for NHS staff on the front line, and our caring staff, it’s not just in our health services, it’s all people who are battling against this virus, they will inevitably be concerned. Some of the work that we’re doing around communications and around personal protective equipment is to just try and ensure there is a common understanding between us of the support that is there for them."
"1199","Jenny Paris: (18:25);It is in no one’s interests that we lose our colleagues on the front line and we really, really want to support them. The only thing I would say is though, clearly in a disease like this, which is affecting everybody, we just need to remember that it’s not just the NHS or just a family. We’re finding this right across the population. It will affect all of us. It will upset undoubtedly our colleagues in the NHS, excuse me, but we shouldn’t take that as any signal specific to their NHS. We do have some new guidance coming out for colleagues in the NHS shortly, and I’m hoping that will help to support them in their work on the front line."
"1200","Robert Jenrick: (19:09);Thank you, Jenny, and the guidance that’s going to be published shortly will also apply to those working in other essential public services, for example, in social care, in local government and other settings, so that they can have the best possible advice as to the type of PPE that they need to continue to do their role safely in the days ahead. The next question I think is from Sam Lister from The Express. Sam."
"1201","Sam: (19:35);Oh, thank you. If I could ask Dr. Harris first, I just want to be really clear about what you’ve said. Are you saying that come judgment day in two or three weeks time, if you’ve not seen the necessary changes that you require, the country realistically is facing lockdown for six months."
"1202","Sam: (19:54);If I could ask the secretary of state, we’ve seen a number of police forces over the weekend set up hotlines where people can report concerns about-"
"1203","Speaker 3: (20:02);… where people can report concerns about the neighbors or the people they believe how flouted the rules. Would you encourage people to raise their concerns with these hotlines?"
"1204","Jenny Paris: (20:13);So I’ll start with that one. So I think just to be clear on what I have actually said, I don’t think I have said we will be in lockdown for six months, just to be clear. I also haven’t said we’ll definitely be in the best place possible until three weeks. The important thing is this is a moving target. If we do well, it moves forward and comes down and we manage all our care through our care, health and care systems sensibly in a controlled way. And that’s what we’re aiming for. The issue about the two to three weeks is there is a time lag between when somebody gets the disease and becomes symptomatic and potentially transmits it. And then very sadly for those people who become ill, they will be, usually are real for a period of time and then deteriorate in their health status."
"1205","Jenny Paris: (21:04);And sadly, some of them will end up dying, and there are time periods for that. So one for how well we do our intervention, if we’ll stop shopping on Monday, we would not expect any of this data to change on Tuesday. We would expect to start seeing a footfall dropping over the first week, we would start to see new infections dropping over the next week and we would start to see deaths dropping over the following week. So the implication there is, and the prime minister’s letter is we actually anticipate that our numbers will get worse over the next week, possibly two, and then we are looking to see whether we have managed to push that curve down and we start to see a decline."
"1206","Jenny Paris: (21:46);The issue about the timeframe is really important. So this is not to say we would be in complete lockdown for six months, but it means that as a nation, we have to be really, really responsible and keep doing what we’re all doing until we’re sure that we can gradually start lifting various interventions which are likely to be spaced based on the science and our data until we gradually come back to a normal way of living and that may mean that we have a few bumps on the way rather than the nice curves that you’ve seen in graphs in the media or on our charts."
"1207","Jenny Paris: (22:23);It’s really important that we all do that together. We will not have succeeded until we get right to the end of this outbreak and we understand how the disease transmits. As we get more information in due course about the pattern of transmission, then we will have more insight into how to manage that tail end of it and we can provide more information then."
"1208","Robert Jenrick: (22:46);Thanks Jenny. Well, as I said earlier, the measures that we’ve taken, which are very restrictive and not things that we’ve taken lightly, the evidence that we’ve seen so far suggests a high degree of compliance from members of the public. The scenes that we saw last weekend have by and large not being replicated this weekend. Police forces have reported very few instances of nonessential retailers remaining open against the rules. And so I think it’s very encouraging that people are increasingly taking this seriously and playing their part in helping us to protect the NHS and save lives as a result. Police forces have powers. They are able to enforce these measures. They can fine individuals and those fines can ratchet up for the very small number of people in society who repeatedly refuse to follow the measures and take the advice of the police. And that’s absolutely right. But we want to do this by consent. We want to do this with us all coming together in a national effort. And there’s a moral obligation on all of us to play our part, protect ourselves, but also protect others."
"1209","Robert Jenrick: (24:02);And that’s regardless of your age. And there are many young people who feel that they are invincible. That isn’t correct. The virus affects all of us, but each of us has the ability to protect others. And so I really urge, once again, everybody to pay heed to adhere to the strong medical advice that we’ve all received to stay at home and where you do go out, do it in the manner that we’ve advised, respecting social distancing advice. And when you can’t work from home, try to work from home, but when you can’t do so, then go to work and at work, follow Public Health England’s guidance whilst you’re there as well so that together we can protect the country and begin to turn the tide."
"1210","Robert Jenrick: (24:52);Now, I’ll come down to the last question, which is from Jack Blanchard from POLITICO. Jack, good afternoon."
"1211","Jack Blanchard: (25:00);Thanks very much. A question for each of you please. First, Chief Medical Officer, we’ve seen very alarmingly large increases in the number of deaths over the last each of the last two or three days. Is that as you had expected or are the number of deaths increasing more quickly than you had hoped? And secretary of state, have you modeled more extreme social distancing measures? Should they be necessary? And can you give us an indication of where things might go if what we’re doing so far doesn’t prove to be enough."
"1212","Jenny Paris: (25:33);So thank you for that Jack. Sadly, the answer is yes, it is as expected in many ways. It’s not an easy position to stand on a platform and say we expect a large number of people to die, but we have a pandemic on our hands and it is an unprecedented event for this generation in this country. I think it is because of where we are on the [inaudible 00:25:56] all the above, as I’ve said previously, applies. We are expecting that that number will increase for the next week or two, but then we anticipate that if we keep doing what we’re doing, and I can’t emphasize that we have to keep doing it, it’s no good just doing it for a few days and stopping, that we do anticipate that those numbers will start to drop."
"1213","Jenny Paris: (26:17);The important thing about the number of deaths and it is a very sadly, an easy to count statistic if you like, and it’s quite difficult to translate what it means often to the public in terms of death rates. And there has been a huge amount of media written and reported on that, but it is a stable statistic, but it lags behind impressions on the rate of increase of infections. So we just need to watch it carefully, hold tight for a week or two, keep doing what we’re doing and then come back and ask me the question again and I think hopefully we’ll be on the way down a little bit."
"1214","Robert Jenrick: (27:00);That’s right. Well, I think as Jenny said, the task for us all now as a country is to adhere to the social distancing measures that we’ve already announced. These are very significant moves, unprecedented in our peace time history. If we all follow those measures, then there’s every reason to believe that we can turn the tide on the virus and we’ll be able to protect the NHS and to save people’s lives. Of course, if those measures prove insufficient or if members of the public are not complying with them, then we will have to consider what further options are available to us. But that is not our intention. We hope and believe that these measures can be sufficient. But it will take, because of the nature of the virus, a couple of weeks as Jenny’s articulated, before we can see whether that’s truly happening."
"1215","Jenny Paris: (27:50);And if I could just add to that just for reassurance because obviously we’ve talked a lot about the capacity of the NHS to manage the number of people flowing through. We have plenty of capacity in the NHS right now to manage people coming through the system. So those deaths represent, very sadly, individuals who have not been able to respond to the high quality care that the NHS has provided."
"1216","Robert Jenrick: (28:14);Very good. Well, I think there’s… Sorry, I think there’s one further question please from Channel 5."
"1217","Kate Proctor: (28:25);I think the further question is from Kate Proctor from The Guardian."
"1218","Robert Jenrick: (28:30);Oh, sorry. I do apologize, Kate. Go ahead."
"1219","Kate Proctor: (28:31);It’s okay."
"1220","Robert Jenrick: (28:32);Hi, good evening?"
"1221","Kate Proctor: (28:35);Afternoon. Seeing the reports of Britt stranded abroad, he really, really wants to get back to the UK. And what can you tell us about the size and the scale of the repatriation package that you’re going to put together? Germany has put aside €50 million. Will Britain be putting together something on a similar scale and will you be using the RAF to bring people home? And if I may, Michael Gove this morning said that the UK haven’t got all the information that it needed from China to make some decisions earlier on in the coronavirus outbreak. Do you know what information was missing from decision making?"
"1222","Robert Jenrick: (29:09);Well, thank you Kate. Well, firstly, with respect to British citizens overseas, we have and take seriously our responsibility to protect our nationals wherever they are in the world. That’s a top priority for the government. And the foreign secretary has been working extremely hard with British missions all over the world to try to bring those citizens back to the UK. And he spent this weekend speaking with his counterparts in a range of countries where there are citizens who we want to get back safely to the UK as soon as possible."
"1223","Robert Jenrick: (29:40);We’ve advised British citizens abroad to come back to the UK whilst there are still commercial flights available. That isn’t the case in all countries, but it is in many. We haven’t ruled out repatriation flights and we are doing those in some cases. There is a flight ongoing at the moment, for example, to Peru to bring back a group of British citizens who’ve been in a difficult situation there."
"1224","Robert Jenrick: (30:03);If we need to do more steps of that kind in the days ahead, then we will of course do so. We want to get those British citizens back safely to the U.K. With respect to the international picture more generally, well the U.K. is leading the international efforts. This is a global pandemic and we want to play our part to the full. the prime minister has been speaking to his counterparts from the G7 and the G20 we are now the world’s leading country in offering funding to support vaccine research. Almost $500 million pounds we’ve offered and we will put more at the disposal of that very important mission if that’s required. And there may be more steps that we can do as an international community in the future and we want to be absolutely at the heart of that."
"1225","Robert Jenrick: (30:56);Of course there will be lessons to be learned in the future about how we and other countries have responded to this virus. But the U.K., our government at the moment, is focused 100% on trying to save lives here. And that means putting in place the measures that we’ve discussed today. It means supporting the NHS and social care, shielding those vulnerable individuals for whom we’ve been providing food parcels beginning this weekend. And above all, for people listening this evening to this broadcast, it means each and every one of us in our own lives following the advice from Jenny and her colleagues. Stay at home, protect the NHS. And that is the way that we can all save lives and begin to turn the tide on the virus. So thank you, Jenny, for joining us this evening. And thank you very much indeed everybody for watching at home."
"1226","Dominic Raab: (00:00);A lot of people would be concerned about that. I can tell you he’s receiving the very best care from the excellent medical team at St. Thomas’s hospital. He remained stable overnight. He’s receiving standard oxygen treatment and breathing without any assistance. He’s not required any mechanical ventilation or non-invasive respiratory support. He remains in good spirits and in keeping with usual clinical practice, his progress continues to be monitored closely in critical care and we’ll give further updates on the PM’s condition when there are any material developments. I know that there’s been a groundswell of messages of support from people here at home, from leaders across the world and I know that everyone will want to join with me in wishing the prime minister a very swift recovery. As you all know, the prime minister asked me to deputize for him whilst he recovers."
"1227","Dominic Raab: (00:54);In line with the prime minister’s instructions, this morning I chaired the meeting of senior ministers tackling coronavirus and this afternoon I chaired an update for members of the Cabinet. I think it’s probably worth just remembering that as will be the case for many people up and down the country who knows someone at work who’s fallen ill with a coronavirus, it comes as a shock to all of us. He’s not just the prime minister for all of us in Cabinet, he’s not just our boss. He’s also our colleague and he’s also our friend. So all of our thoughts and prayers are with the prime minister at this time, with Carrie and with his whole family. I’m confident he’ll pull through because if there’s one thing I know about this prime minister, he’s a fighter and he’ll be back at the helm leading us through this crisis in short order."
"1228","Dominic Raab: (01:49);Of course, for us in Cabinet, we know exactly what he wants from us and what he expects from us right now. Following the Cabinet discussion today, I can reassure the prime minister and we can reassure the public that his team will not blink and we will not flinch from the task at hand at this crucial moment. We will keep all of our focus and all of our resolve with calm determination on delivering the government’s plan to defeat the coronavirus. It’s with that objective and with that unity of purpose that the Cabinet turned to business today. We had reports from four ministerial groups on the action we’re taking across all of the strategic priority areas, including NHS capacity, procurement of ventilators, and personal protective equipment, the delivery of public services including social care, on the economy, and our support for both businesses and workers, and of course on the international action we’re taking to reinforce our efforts on the home front."
"1229","Dominic Raab: (02:49);As we’ve explained before, our action plan aims to slow the spread of the virus, so fewer people need hospital treatment at any one time and that will help us protect the NHS’s ability to cope. At every step, we’ve been following the scientific advice, the medical advice, and we’ve been very deliberate in the actions that we’ve taken so that we take the right steps at the right moment in time. We’re increasing our NHS capacity by dramatically expanding the number of beds, key staff, lifesaving equipment on the frontline so people have the care they need when they need it most. As we’ve consistently said, we’re instructing people to stay at home so we can protect the NHS and so that we can save lives."
"1230","Dominic Raab: (03:37);So today, I can report that through the government’s ongoing monitoring and testing program that again, as of today, 213,181 people have now been tested for the coronavirus, 55,242 people have tested positive. The number of people admitted to hospital with coronavirus symptoms now stands at 18,589. Of those who have contracted the virus, 6,159 have, I’m very sorry to say, died. Every death in this pandemic is a tragedy and our thoughts and our prayers are with their loved ones at what must be an incredibly difficult time. I think these figures reinforce that the single most important thing that we can all of us do right now in this national effort to defeat the coronavirus is keep on following the government’s advice, which is to stay home, protect the NHS and save lives. I’ll now turn to Sir Patrick who I think will talk us through some of the data."
"1231","Sir Patrick: (04:39);Thank you very much. May I have the first slide, please. It’s worth remembering this is a brand new illness. It transmits relatively easily and in some people of course, it’s severe. It’s therefore important that we break the transmission in society we do not allow this virus to go from household to household and that’s what the social distancing measures are about, trying to slow the rate of transmission. In order to know whether those measures are working, we track a number of things and here you can see the transport use change which we’ve shown before indicating very substantial reductions in the use of London Underground, the buses, national rail and indeed, use of all motor vehicles. This and other measures show that the contact between people has reduced dramatically as a result of the social distancing measures that have been put in place. That, in turn, should lead to a substantial reduction in the transmission of the virus in the community."
"1232","Sir Patrick: (05:44);This, if I can have the next slide, please, moves then through into the fewer new cases appearing is the aim to try and reduce the number of new cases. This shows the number of cases since the 16th of March through to the 7th of April and what you can see is there is not that big upswing of growth that we talked about at the beginning. There is a fairly steady increase in numbers. It’s possible that we’re beginning to see the beginning of change in terms of the curve flattening a little bit. We won’t know that for sure for a week or so, but what we’re not seeing is an acceleration. It’s important that we keep these new cases down because of course, this in turn, leads to the number of people going into hospital. The aim all along is to reduce the number of cases below the capacity for the NHS and to save lives. Can I have the next slide, please?"
"1233","Sir Patrick: (06:43);This graph shows the number of hospital admissions in London at the top and then in other areas you can see, again, there’s been a steady increase since the 16th of March up until the 7th of April, but there hasn’t been the accelerated takeoff. Again, it’s possible that we’re beginning to see the start of a change where we might see numbers flattening off. We won’t be sure about that for a week or so and we need to keep looking at it, but it does begin to suggest that things might be moving in the right direction in terms of numbers. It’s important that we carry on with the measures we’ve got in place in order to make sure that this does go in the right direction. The important thing beyond these numbers is what happens in intensive care units and that we keep the intensive care unit number down as well. That’s another thing which may be moving in the right direction, but I do want to, here, say a big thank you to everybody in the NHS, the frontline staff who are working so hard to make this work."
"1234","Sir Patrick: (07:49);One other point, as well as looking at numbers, there are clinical trials starting trying to look at treatments that might make a difference. As of this afternoon there are over 1,900 patients in clinical trials across a hundred hospitals. That’s an important part of how we’re going to tackle this. The ICU beds are important, and the next slide, please, shows that the number of ICU beds has been increasing. So this is a graph over time from the 21st of March, the 6th of April showing an increase in the ICU beds that’s been most marked in London, which has had the biggest outbreak so far, but it’ll increase in the rest of the country and the new Nightingale hospitals in London, Birmingham, Manchester, Bristol, Harrogate, and further increases in capacity of what the NHS is planning for to cope with the numbers that we’re talking about."
"1235","Sir Patrick: (08:44);Finally, I’ve talked about the beginning, I talked about the fact that we need to see that coming through into admissions to hospitals and to ICU, and then it takes a few weeks for that to feed through, unfortunately, for some people into death and I’d like to just show the death figures. So these are the graphs showing the numbers of deaths across different countries. You can see that despite a little uptick in the numbers today and the numbers do bounce around the UK is on track. We’re roughly a couple of weeks behind France, a few weeks behind Italy in terms of the numbers, but you can see that broadly, things across Europe move in the same direction. We would expect the numbers of deaths to lag after the ICU cases by a couple of weeks. So we should expect these to start coming down in two or three weeks time. Thank you for foreign secretary."
"1236","Dominic Raab: (09:34);Thank you, Patrick. I’m now happy to take some questions from the media. Laura Kuenssberg from the BBC."
"1237","Laura Kuenssberg: (09:41);Thank you very much for foreign secretary. With the prime minister, absent at this vital time, if there is a genuine disagreement in the Cabinet, who actually makes the decision? If I can ask the chief scientific advisor, you’ve shown that there has been an increase in the capacity of the number of intensive care beds available around the country, but on the current numbers, will there be enough beds as this grows?"
"1238","Dominic Raab: (10:05);Well, first of all, decision-making by government is made by collective Cabinet responsibility. So that is the same as before, but we’ve got very clear directions, very clear instructions from the prime minister. We’re focused with total unity and total resolve on implementing them so that when he’s back, and I hope in very short order, we will have made the progress that you would expect and that the country would expect."
"1239","Sir Patrick: (10:30);In terms of the ICU beds, and Chris Whitty has being clear about this as well, there are always times in every winter when ICU beds top out in individual hospitals and that may happen and I can’t guarantee it won’t. What we can say, though, is that the numbers as we look at them now, look as though we should come in about right. There shouldn’t be an overall increase above the number of beds available. The NHS I think has done an amazing job of increasing the capacity of ICU and so things seem to be tracking in the right direction, but I don’t think I can say more than that. I don’t know, Chris, whether you want to add anything."
"1240","Chria Whitty: (11:05);I agree."
"1241","Dominic Raab: (11:08);Laura, is that okay? Did you want to come back on any of it?"
"1242","Laura Kuenssberg: (11:11);Yeah. The Foreign Secretary Cabinet always, in theory, runs on collective responsibilities, but there are always times when, in the end, one person has to make the decision. In normal circumstances, the prime minister is the ultimate decision-maker. In these circumstances, are you that person or what happens if there is no agreement?"
"1243","Dominic Raab: (11:30);Well, as I said, we’ve got collective cabinet responsibility but the arrangements are very clear. The prime minister has asked for me to deputize for him to start just starting the responsibilities for as long as he’s unable to do that. We’ve got in the discharge of those responsibilities and frankly the direction instructions, he’s given very clear plans. So we’re all focused with a unity of purpose in a clear and calm determination to get that done from the procurement of PPE, getting it to the front line to supporting businesses and all of the work in DFID and the foreign office that we’re doing out on the international level to reinforce that effort on the home front. Robert Peston, ITV."
"1244","Robert Peston: (12:12);Good afternoon. Mr Raab, you say that you have very clear instructions from the prime minister about what to do, but if there needed to be a significant change of direction, do you have the authority to make that change of direction or would you wait for the prime minister’s return? If I could ask Sir Patrick and Mr. Whitty, your own chart today does show the rates of growth in the number of deaths in Germany is much slower than the other European countries, including the UK that you cite. What is there that we can learn from Germany?"
"1245","Dominic Raab: (12:56);Well, Rob, on your question to me, I’m being tasked when I was appointed, given very clear steer from the prime minister and obviously, as we’ve been going through this crisis, very clear instructions in terms of dealing with coronavirus. He’s asked me to deputize for him for as long as is necessary, but the normal Cabinet collective responsibility and principles that inform that will apply. Patrick."
"1246","Sir Patrick: (13:19);We look at all of the countries and try and understand what differences there are in terms of responses. We look right the way across the world in regular contact with the chief scientific advisors and chief medical officers in other countries to try and understand different approaches taken and different effects. You’re right, the German curve looks as though it’s lower at the moment and that is important. I don’t have a clear answer for you to exactly what it is the reason for that. There are obviously two things that one we’ll look at in terms of any response to any outbreak."
"1247","Sir Patrick: (13:51);One is the virus itself and the other is the society into which that virus comes. There are things to do with demographics, there are things to do with the way systems are organized and, of course, that may be differences in the way certain responses have been taken and we don’t know, but we’re in regular contact with the other countries. Again, I’ll see if Chris wants to add anything to that."
"1248","Chria Whitty: (14:09);What I think that the one thing I’d add to that is we all know that Germany got ahead in terms of its ability to do testing for the virus. There’s a lot to learn from that and we’ve been trying to learn the lessons from that."
"1249","Dominic Raab: (14:20);Did you want to follow up there, Rob boy?"
"1250","Robert Peston: (14:22);Well it was just, you didn’t quite say that you feel confident that if you had to make a change of direction and you weren’t able to communicate with the prime minister, would you have the confidence in doing that?"
"1251","Dominic Raab: (14:37);I’ve got total confidence in the arrangements that the prime minister has put in place so that I can discharge the responsibility for him, deputizing for him while he’s out of action. Obviously, we hope that we’ll be for a very limited period of time. Mark Austin from Sky."
"1252","Mark Austin: (14:52);Thank you very much indeed, foreign secretary. First and foremost, everyone on this program and everybody at Sky News send their very best to the prime minister. We wish him a speedy recovery. My question is this, the prime minister is in intensive care. The health secretary caught the virus, the chief medical officer caught the virus. We’re very pleased to see him back at work, but three key people responsible for telling the country how not to get it, got it. So with respect, and I mean it is with respect, how did it come to this and how was that allowed to happen?"
"1253","Dominic Raab: (15:28);Because you have a virus which is totally indiscriminate. We follow, all of us, the guidance as carefully as possible, but it’s a very dangerous virus. It’s very contagious and it just goes to show that no one is impervious to it and we all need to follow the guidance, both to the letter and spirit. Did you want to come back? Mark?"
"1254","Mark Austin: (15:57);Yeah. And Chris, does he have an answer?"
"1255","Chria Whitty: (16:00);Well, the answer is exactly the same, really. We all know that this is an extremely easy virus to pass on. That is exactly why the lockdown was necessary. That was why the very large number of things that we’ve had to ask people to do and not do are in place because it is extremely easy to catch this virus and it is extremely easy to pass it on, even if people take really careful precautions in terms of things like washing their hands, which remains critical. So I think it’s a very clear illustration of the fact that this is why we’re having to do this to ensure that we protect the NHS and save the lives of other people."
"1256","Dominic Raab: (16:38);Jason Groves from the Daily Mail."
"1257","Jason Groves: (16:43);Thanks, Mr. Raab. You mentioned that you’ve had instructions from the PM. I wonder, have you had instructions about what he wants to do about the looming decision on whether to extend the lockdown and can you give the country any idea of what that might be? We’re seeing Germany and Austria level with people about how long things might take and how they might be lifted. A question for Sir Patrick, last month in that room you told us we were three or four weeks behind Italy. We’ve seen, given the shocking death told today, to still be getting a similar outcome to Italy. Are there things that we could and should have done or was this outcome always inevitable and are things we can do now to make a difference?"
"1258","Dominic Raab: (17:27);Well, Jason, just in terms of the review, we’re not at that stage yet. We will take any decision when the time is right based on the facts and the scientific and medical advice. Our number one and our overriding focus right now, as has just been demonstrated by the previous question, is to remain absolutely focused on conveying the key message, which is everyone needs to keep adhering to this guidance. We’ve got a long bank holiday, Easter weekend coming up, warm weather. We understand that people are making big sacrifices to follow this guidance. It is helping. It is contributing to our ability to tackle the coronavirus. The worst thing now would be to take our foot off the pedal to ease up on that and risk losing the gains that have been made. So it’s absolutely critical that people keep up that discipline and the vast majority will and we hope everyone will follow that example because it is the way to make sure we consolidate the progress we’ve made and don’t lose the progress we’ve made. Chris, [crosstalk 00:18:31]."
"1259","Chria Whitty: (18:31);It was Patrick-"
"1260","Dominic Raab: (18:31);Oh, it’s Patrick. Apologies."
"1261","Sir Patrick: (18:32);So this is a pandemic meaning it’s everywhere and that’s why we’re seeing it across many different countries and across all populations. We are probably three or four weeks behind Italy in terms of the outbreak. It doesn’t mean we end up with the same numbers and of course it’s important that as the ICU capacity has been built up, this idea of keeping the numbers below the ICU capacity, that’s absolutely critical. It’s also worth just reflecting on the fact that the most important thing we can do is to implement the measures that are in place now to keep this suppressed. That’s really, really important. It’s what we need to be focused on now. It’s how we’re going to come out the other side to be able to say that the numbers are under control and we can then move on to the next phase."
"1262","Dominic Raab: (19:21);Do you want to come back, Jason, on any of that?"
"1263","Jason Groves: (19:24);Well, just to clarify, Mr. Raab, it sounds like the instructions you’re getting from the PM is that this lockdown is going to have to stay. We are going to have to keep our foot on the pedal for a few more weeks at least. Is that a fair interpretation?"
"1264","Dominic Raab: (19:36);No, I think we’ve been clear all along. We’ll be guided by the evidence that are the measures that we put in place on social distancing, on everything else, the impact that they’ve had. Once we’ve got reliable data on that, which will come up in the days ahead, we can consider whether and when and how we want to take any further decisions. But our number one focus right now is to keep the discipline of compliance with those measures because it will help us make progress. That’s the way we’ll get through this crisis and get out the other side as quickly and as effectively as possible. Heather Stewart from The Guardian."
"1265","Heather Stewart: (20:13);Oh,hello. This is a follow up to Jason’s question, to some extent. Were you suggesting now there that we won’t see a three-week review of the lockdown measures as we were promised when they were put in place, that we won’t see that if the prime minister is still in hospital. Will you wait until he’s not in hospital to do that? Slightly more broadly that the modeling that was published on Friday with the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine suggested that measures might have to stay in place for many months, social distancing for many months, at least, they said, with periodic lockdowns in order to keep the outbreak within the capacity of the NHS? I wonder whether that seems plausible and whether it’s now time to level with people, with kids who are wondering whether they’re going to see their friends before the end of the summer term and so on, that this is going to have to go on for months, not weeks?"
"1266","Dominic Raab: (21:02);Well, I think we have leveled with everyone from the outset. We’ve been as transparent as possible in relation to all of the data and all the information. That’s why we’ve got the chief scientific advisor and the chief medical officer here. But the critical thing is to take evidence-based decisions. So we’ve said that we will take any review once we’ve got the evidence, the measures are working and having the kind of impact taking us past the peak, which means that they can be responsibly done. We’re not at that stage yet. CMO, do you want to add anything?"
"1267","Chria Whitty: (21:31);Anything I’d add is really what we said yesterday. I think it’s really important that we get to the point that we all are confident that we’re beyond the peak and then at that point, start making it clear what combination of things and over what period of time seems a sensible combination to take us through. Because as I said yesterday, there are a large number of different things we need to take into account here in terms of the impact on health, the direct effects of the virus itself and also the indirect effects on the health service more widely."
"1268","Dominic Raab: (22:02);Heather, do you want to follow up or anything else you want to-"
"1269","Heather Stewart: (22:05);Yes. In terms of when we might see that review, it depends on when you feel you have enough and relevant enough data? We won’t necessarily see it [inaudible 00:22:17]"
"1270","Dominic Raab: (22:16);It’ll be evidence based and so we’ll rely on the evidence we get from the impact of the measures that have already been taken. As Chris said, what we need to do is get beyond the peak when we can responsibly take any further decisions based, as I said, on the evidence that we’ve got, we’ve set that position out all along and we want to follow it because it’s the right thing to do. Again, it’s the right thing to do to get as effectively and as quickly as possible through the coronavirus challenge. Joe Murphy from The Evening Standard."
"1271","Joe Murphy: (22:45);Mr. Raab, I join you in wishing the best to the prime minister and his recovery. Can you say how the government is doing on course to meet the target of 100,000 tests per day? As the man who’s now in charge, will you ensure personally it’s delivered by the end of the month? Professor Whitty, a lot of people are worried that care homes for the elderly are not getting the same support of other branches of the health and care service. Can you address such worries whether doctors and nurses will go into homes rather than simply [inaudible 00:23:20] patients, whether there’ll be medically qualified professionals going in and whether you can stop agency nurses from, or carers rather, from looking after more than one home and then risking spreading? Why are the deaths in care homes not included in the daily tally of figures?"
"1272","Dominic Raab: (23:40);Thanks, Joe. So just on the most recent data that’s been released on tests, there were 14,000 in a single day and so that shows progress. We’ve had 7,500 NHS workers and their families tested and we’ve got nine drive through sites currently operational in Nottingham, Chessington, Greenwich, Wembley, Sandwell, Manchester, Belfast, Edgbaston and Glasgow and Cardiff will be the 10th, which will be open shortly. So we’re all making progress on that. In terms of the data, a question on RNS versus the NHS, I don’t know whether Sir Patrick, you wanted to address that."
"1273","Sir Patrick: (24:16);I’m happy to do that. The international reporting standard for death, all the other countries are based on hospitalized deaths confirmed and that’s the same as the data that you’re seeing. The ONS data, which are important look at overall deaths on death certificates where coronavirus is mentioned so that they are not confirmed deaths necessarily. It’s important to have both of those, but that’s what the difference between the two numbers is."
"1274","Joe Murphy: (24:41);So is that on the care homes?"
"1275","Chria Whitty: (24:42);On the care homes, so firstly, just to add to that, the ONS data does include care home deaths. The hospital data obviously does not, so it’s one of the key differences. In terms of the looking after the residents of care homes and indeed nursing homes, we’ve said right from the beginning that this is one of the most difficult things we have to do and one of the most important things we have to do. That needs to, in a sense, balance the needs to have the right nursing, medical and other care support for the care homes whilst minimizing people going into care homes unnecessarily because almost by definition, most residents of care homes are relatively vulnerable people."
"1276","Chria Whitty: (25:25);It is important we get that balance right, that we protect people, for example, when they come back from hospital that they do get the right medical care. But as I said right at the beginning of this epidemic, care homes and nursing homes are going to provide us with some of the biggest challenges. We have seen already that over 9% of care homes have reported cases. I regret to say, I think the number will go up over time despite excellent work by the care homes staff, by nurses who go in and by doctors. I would encourage people not to go into care homes unless they need to."
"1277","Dominic Raab: (26:03);Rob Merrick from the Inde."
"1278","Rob Merrick: (26:04);Thank you very much, foreign secretary. A question first for Professor Whitty. The Independent has sent a letter to GPS from Jenny Harris, which appears to raise concerns that some highly vulnerable people who need to be shielded are not being shielded. We’ve spoken to the family of a 95-year-old deaf, blind woman who’s totally dependent on her daughter for care. She doesn’t meet the criteria, she’s been told. Are you concerned that there are many, many people out there who are not being shielded as they should and what are you going to do about that? And a question please, for you, Mr. Raab, returning to Joe’s question, the government made a promise to the British people last week that a 100,000 daily tests would be carried out by the end of the month. We learned yesterday that the antibody tests won’t be ready by that date. So can I just be clear? Are you now promising you will carry out 100,000 daily antigen tests, the test for the virus itself by the end of the month? If you can’t meet that commitment, will somebody carry the cap?"
"1279","Dominic Raab: (27:03);Well, just on that, I think the health secretary was very clear on the target. What I’ve tried to set out is the progress that we’ve made. Clearly more work to do, but important that we’ve made the progress we have so far. Chris."
"1280","Chria Whitty: (27:14);So the situation of shielding, is that there are broadly three groups of people who we’ve asked to do different things. There’s everybody who we really want to stay at home unless they’re going out for work, for necessary food and medicine, for medical care or for exercise. We’ve really been very clear about that because that is the way we protect everybody, including the people who are shielded. Then there’s a higher risk group of people who are people, on the whole, who are over 70 and have pre-existing health conditions, which makes up roughly 16 million people overall."
"1281","Chria Whitty: (27:52);The recommendations are the same for those, but we really need them to do it for their own protection. It’s not just to protect the NHS and to protect wider society or that helps with that, but it also really helps to protect them. But there’s this particularly vulnerable group of around about just under 1.5 million people. The exact numbers are kind of being sorted out at the moment, who we are very keen to have the absolute minimum contact possible for quite a long period of time. I think what we’ve been very clear is that there’s a group of people who we are able to identify, which is the great majority, who have been identified and written to in the first wave and there’s a second wave of letters going out today from NHS digital, over this week, which is we have identified centrally from their medical records, this is necessary."
"1282","Chria Whitty: (28:44);There are additional people that have been identified either by specialists, medical groups, or in some cases, by GPs who know that someone has got a group of conditions or a particular condition that isn’t on the list but makes them particularly vulnerable. But equally, so people are being added to the list as a result of that. Equally, there’ve been some people who will have taken a decision in discussion with their GP that they simply do not wish to be part of this, that the idea of being for many weeks completely cut off, at least physically, from a society except for the absolute basic necessities. Of course, we hope people will be linked to people by social media and other areas that this is not something they wish to do."
"1283","Chria Whitty: (29:26);This particularly, for example, might apply to people who have had a terminal diagnosis and doing palliative care and are on the last stages where they would just make a rational life decision that was not what they wish to do. So there will be people in terms around the big group who will have been identified. There will be some people who go into the shielding program who are not initially identified and there’ll be some people who initially were identified who either because their medical condition is different from how it has been centrally recorded or because of their own choices in discussion with their doctor who will choose not to be part of that. That was always something we expected to happen."
"1284","Dominic Raab: (30:05);Did you have a follow up, Rob?"
"1285","Rob Merrick: (30:07);Can I come back to you, Mr. Raab? I don’t think you really answered my question. Just to be clear, we know that the antibody tests will not be ready by the end of the month. Can you say, is your promise now today that the government will carry out 100,000 daily antigen tests by the end of the month?"
"1286","Dominic Raab: (30:23);Well, I’m not going to say anything different from what the health secretary’s already said. What I hope people understand is that we are striving every sinew to get both sets of tests to the highest level we can. That involves tapping the domestic sources and supplies, but also using the foreign office network. We’re teaming up with DFID and the Department for International Trade to try and get as many international suppliers. But of course, lots of these things are in very high demand, but we are doing everything we can on every front to get all of the testing capabilities we need. Yes, the health secretary’s 100,000 per day target still stands. Thank you all very much."
"1287","Alok Sharma: (00:00);Good afternoon, and thank you for joining us for the daily briefing on our fight against coronavirus. I’m joined today by Dr. Yvonne Doyle, who is the medical director of Public Health England. Before Yvonne provides an update on the latest data from our COBRA coronavirus fact file, I’d like to update you on the steps that we are taking to defeat this pandemic."
"1288","Alok Sharma: (00:24);Our step-by-step action plan is aiming to slow the spread of the virus so fewer people need hospital treatment at any one time, protecting the ability of the NHS to cope. Throughout our response to coronavirus, we have been following the scientific and medical advice. We have been deliberate in our actions, taking the right steps at the right time. We’re also taking unprecedented action to increase NHS capacity by dramatically expanding the number of beds, key staff, and lifesaving equipment on the front line, provide the care when people need it most."
"1289","Alok Sharma: (01:05);The daily figures showed that a total of 152,979 people in the UK have now been tested for coronavirus. Of those, 29,474 have tested positive. The number of people admitted to hospital in England with coronavirus symptoms is now 10,767, whilst 3,915 of those are in London and 1,918 in the Midlands."
"1290","Alok Sharma: (01:39);Of those hospitalized in the UK, sadly, 2,352 have died. This is an increase of 563 fatalities since yesterday. The youngest of them was just 13 years old. All our thoughts and prayers are with the families and loved ones of those who have lost their lives. This is more tragic evidence that this virus does not discriminate."
"1291","Alok Sharma: (02:10);The coronavirus pandemic is the biggest threat our country has faced in decades, and we’re not alone. All over the world, we are seeing the devastating impact of this invisible killer. We recognize the extreme disruption, the necessary actions we are asking people to take, are having on their lives, their businesses, jobs, and the nation’s economy. I want to thank everyone across our whole country for the huge effort that is being made collectively in tackling the COVID-19 pandemic. To the frontline workers treating and caring for patients, the people delivering supplies to their neighbors, and the millions staying at home, thank you. You are protecting the NHS and saving lives."
"1292","Alok Sharma: (03:00);I want to thank businesses too. Through your support for your workers and your communities, and through your willingness to support our health service, you are making a real difference, whether it’s INEOS building a new hand sanitizer plant near Middlesbrough in just 10 days, or UCL engineers working with Mercedes Formula One to build new continuous positive airway pressure machines which help patients to breathe more easily, or broadband providers giving their customers unlimited data to stay connected, or indeed, London’s ExCel Center being converted into the NHS Nightingale hospital with space for 4,000 patients. These are just a few of the examples of businesses from across our great nation supporting lifesaving work."
"1293","Alok Sharma: (03:51);There are also thousands of businesses, large and small, which have worked with staff to ensure that they’re supported in the days and weeks ahead, whether that is through ensuring PHE guidelines are followed on site, implementing furlough schemes, carrying over annual leave, or providing the means to work from home. I want to convey my heartfelt thanks to all of those businesses, up and down the country, which are working to keep our economy going, so that when this crisis passes, and it will, we are ready to bounce back."
"1294","Alok Sharma: (04:27);Our businesses are doing all they can to support our people, and I want to make it clear that government, in turn, will do all it can to support our businesses. We have already taken unprecedented action to support businesses, safeguard jobs, and protect the economy. From today, businesses will start benefiting from 22 billion pounds in the form of business rates relief and grants of up to 25,000 pounds which are being paid into the bank accounts of the smallest high street firms."
"1295","Alok Sharma: (05:03);On Saturday, I said that we had provided funds to councils in England for grants to small businesses. As of today, these local authorities have received more than 12 billion pounds. This afternoon, I held a call with hundreds of local authorities across England and made clear that this money must reach businesses as quickly as possible, and I know that businesses across England have already started to receive these grants."
"1296","Alok Sharma: (05:33);We know high street banks are working really hard to support the UK through this period, including through mortgage holidays and increased credit facilities. Loans for businesses are also being issued through the COVID Business Interruption Loan Scheme since it came into operation last week. The Chancellor, together with Bank of England and the Financial Conduct Authority, wrote to the chief executives of the UK banks to urge them to make sure that the benefits of the Loan Scheme are passed through to businesses and consumers. It would be completely unacceptable if any banks were unfairly refusing funds to good businesses in financial difficulty."
"1297","Alok Sharma: (06:19);Just as the taxpayer stepped in to help the banks back in 2008, we will work with the banks to do everything they can to repay that favor and support the businesses and people of the United Kingdom in their time of need."
"1298","Alok Sharma: (06:36);Of course, this is a brand-new scheme and, as with all new schemes, it will not be perfect from the outset. We are listening all the time. And in response to concerns that we’ve heard from businesses, we are looking at ways in which we can ensure they get the support they need. The chancellor will be saying more on this in the coming days.."
"1299","Alok Sharma: (06:59);It is crucial that when we overcome this crisis, as in time we will, that businesses are in a good position to move forward. Times are tough, and we have harder times ahead of us. But I know that together, we will pull through."
"1300","Alok Sharma: (07:20);Yvonne?"
"1301","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (07:21);Thank you, Secretary of State. I would like to present you with some slides just to give you an update on what is happening across the country and also with the health system. Could I have slide one, please? This shows a slightly concerning trend because we have seen an uptick in motor vehicle traffic. The message here really is people do need to stay at home. Most are doing the right thing, as you can see from the rapid decline in public transport use. Everyone needs to do that. The message here is we need to save lives and to protect the NHS, so please stay at home."
"1302","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (08:04);Could I have slide two, please? This shows the number of new UK cases as of today. It is slightly concerning. It’s still too early to say whether the plateau of hospital admissions has ended, but we’ve now seen three days of increases in a row. Again, we need to protect the NHS, and the best way to do that is to stay at home, to avoid catching the disease yourself, and obviously avoid giving it to anyone else. That is the way that the NHS can continue to protect us."
"1303","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (08:43);Could I have slide three, please? This slide shows the England hospital admissions. I think a lot of reporting has been about London, and you can see why on this slide. That’s where coronavirus is most advanced. But the chart shows that the threat is everywhere. We need to protect the NHS everywhere. The Midlands now is obviously a concern as well."
"1304","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (09:12);Slide four, please. This is what it’s all about. It is about saving lives. This slide shows the global death comparisons. We need to save lives. As things stand, it has not been as severe here as in France, and we’re just tucked in under the USA, and obviously, Italy on a different trajectory, and Spain and United States, as we said. But there is no reason to be complacent. Stay at home. Protect the NHS. Save lives. Thank you."
"1305","Alok Sharma: (09:47);Thank you, Yvonne. I think we’ll now move to the Q&A. The first question is from the BBC, Laura Kuenssberg. Laura?"
"1306","Laura Kuenssberg: (09:54);Thank you very much, Secretary of State. The peak of this disease seems to be coming earlier than the government expected, but you are missing the testing targets. There’s a huge amount of evidence of staff not having the equipment they desperately need. There are not enough ventilators. Do you accept now that the approach and the response from government has just been too slow?"
"1307","Alok Sharma: (10:16);Laura, thank you very much for that question. Can I just make it absolutely clear, and the prime minister has been very clear about this as well, is that increasing testing capacity is absolutely the government’s top priority. We’re now at 10,000 tests a day. We’re rolling out additional networks of labs and testing sites. In terms of PHE, over the last two weeks, 390 million products have been distributed. Of course, we will continue to do more and work to make sure that PHE is available. As you know, there is a hotline which is available, 24-hour hotline, for NHS staff as well."
"1308","Alok Sharma: (10:49);But Yvonne, if you wanted to comment on this, please?"
"1309","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (10:52);Thank you, Secretary of State. Laura, there is positive news about this. The NHS and PHE committed to make 10,000 tests a day available. We have met that target by the end of March, early April, and we have some more capacity. Our commitment is actually to go to 25,000 tests a day, and we are confident, with our industry partners, that we will achieve that. That means patients are getting the tests they need, but there is also some spare capacity in that for testing the most urgent healthcare workers. Alongside that, as the Secretary of State has said, there is a second front opening and is already testing a couple of thousand healthcare workers in order of priority. So we are definitely increasing our testing capacity."
"1310","Alok Sharma: (11:45);Thank you, Laura. Next question is from Sky, Beth Rigby. Beth?"
"1311","Beth Rigby: (11:50);Thank you. A question first for Yvonne Doyle. Can you give us the number and proportion of frontline NHS staff who’ve been tested for coronavirus? You said 2,000. Is that out of half a million frontline NHS workers. And how are you intending to scale that up?"
"1312","Beth Rigby: (12:07);And if I may, to the Secretary of State, the prime minister said nearly two weeks ago he wanted to get to quarter of a million tests a day. That was the virus and antibody tests. Latest daily figure is 10,412 tests. Why is it taking so long for reality to match the rhetoric? And will you give a clear timeframe as to when you will deliver on the prime minister’s promise? Thank you."
"1313","Alok Sharma: (12:31);Well, Yvonne, could I ask you to take that first?"
"1314","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (12:31);Thank you, Secretary of State."
"1315","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (12:33);Beth, the number of tests undertaken in the NHS-Public Health England combined testing capacity is just increasing at the moment, so that would be a relatively small number. But there is capacity, for example, today for almost 3,000, and that will increase as we get to 25,000, to that capacity."
"1316","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (12:55);The important capacity is in the second strand, where we will have five centers where people can drive through and get their testing done in order of priority. NHS chief executives are identifying that priority. The intention here is to get from thousands to hundreds of thousands within the coming weeks. We are very committed to our NHS frontline staff. Thank you."
"1317","Alok Sharma: (13:20);Yvonne, thank you for that."
"1318","Alok Sharma: (13:21);I think, Beth, Yvonne has explained the details in terms of ramping up testing. You made particular reference to the antibody tests. What I can say on that is, of course, we are urgently evaluating that test, and it is an absolute priority. And of course, this is about making sure that people who have the test can find out whether they’ve had the virus and are now immune to it. The chief scientific officer has said that the accuracy of this test is incredibly important, so it’s also important that we get this right before we launch the test itself."
"1319","Alok Sharma: (13:55);Thank you for that."
"1320","Alok Sharma: (13:56);The next question is from ITV, Robert Peston. Robert?"
"1321","Robert Peston: (14:01);Hello. Good afternoon. Largely a question, I think, for Yvonne Doyle. Yvonne, I reported this afternoon that a million antibody tests are arriving from China in the coming few days. They have been paid for by the government. The government has said it won’t pay for anything that it doesn’t think works. But I am told that PHE, Public Health England, is dragging its feet in giving its approval to the use of these tests. I’m also told that these tests would be an alternative to PCR and would actually detect active virus, for example, in frontline staff. When will they be in hospitals for use?"
"1322","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (14:43);Thank you, Robert. The important thing about these antibody tests… This is not a matter of dragging our feet. It’s important that the test is valid, that it does what it says it does. As the chief medical officer said, something worse than no test is a wrong test or a bad test. That is what is being tested at the moment."
"1323","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (15:02);In the meantime, there is a separate strand which is very important, which is called zero prevalence, where our own labs are testing the validity of whether the blood samples we’re getting very generously from people who’ve had the disease, but also from Blood and Transplant and from the College of GP’s surveillance scheme, whether those tests are also valid, and we are very pleased about that. So I would say, Robert, as soon as we can, we want to be out there doing these tests."
"1324","Alok Sharma: (15:33);Thank you. Thank you, Robert. Thank you, Yvonne."
"1325","Alok Sharma: (15:36);The next question is from the Evening Standard, from Joe Murphy. Joe?"
"1326","Robert Peston: (15:41);Hello. May I ask Yvonne Doyle, if 2,000 NHS staff have been tested so far and 125,000 are self-isolating, or thereabout, that’s, by my reckoning, 1.6%, can I pin you to a target for the improvement that you promised in the previous answer? What, for example, will that number look like in one week from today? And do you think people are getting complacent about the measures that have been put in?"
"1327","Robert Peston: (16:09);And Mr. Sharma, I think a lot of us feel that we haven’t yet been given a full and practical explanation of why Germany is able to test many times more than the UK. Do they have more labs, more equipment? Are they making better use of universities or the private sector than us, and if so, why? Or are they using a different, perhaps a quicker test? And what are the reagents that we’re struggling to get? We’re looking to work out, is this a capacity issue for Germany versus the UK, or is it a political choice that’s made to test fewer people?"
"1328","Alok Sharma: (16:42);Yvonne, I’m wondering whether you might take that first."
"1329","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (16:46);I presume you’re talking about the healthcare worker frontline testing. The intention there, as I say, is to go from tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands. That will have to go on the basis of the priority that is identified as to which of these workers are actually needed… When I say workers, they’re really staff or colleagues… are needed in which settings, particularly where the sickest patients are, and they will be tested first. That is the intention over the coming weeks."
"1330","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (17:15);While I’m speaking, do you wish me to speak about the reagents?"
"1331","Alok Sharma: (17:17);Yes, please."
"1332","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (17:18);Just about the reagents, so the reagents are generally produced by the manufacturers of the machines, and so the reagents that work best are those that work with the machines that they’re intended for. That’s the most efficient. We are working with the industry to ensure that that supply is good and that the machinery is most efficient. But as the head of the industry has said, there is a global market in this, but they are committed to working with the UK government and with us to ensure that we get those tests through as quickly. And there is complimentary work going on to ensure that we can supplement that if needed, and that is very exciting for the future."
"1333","Alok Sharma: (18:01);Joe, I think you made reference to Germany. We, of course, look to see where we can learn throughout this process. Of course, we are working with industry, we’re working with the scientific community to make sure that we have maximum possible supplies."
"1334","Alok Sharma: (18:14);But I just go back to the point that Jenny Harries, the deputy chief medical officer, made some days ago when she said we are looking to create a lab-based testing on a scale which is comparable to building a medical equivalent of a car factory. We are trying to do something at huge scale very fast, but I think as you’ve heard from Yvonne, we are making progress, we will continue to make progress, and we are determined to make sure that we have the supplies and provide the support that we can for people across the UK, and particularly the most vulnerable and those key workers in the NHS."
"1335","Alok Sharma: (18:53);Thank you very much for that, Joe."
"1336","Alok Sharma: (18:54);The next question is from Financial Times, from Laura Hughes. Laura?"
"1337","Laura Hughes: (18:59);Good afternoon. Can I ask, what is the government’s exit strategy for getting us out of this lockdown, and what role will testing play in that? Jeremy Hunt has called for mass community testing. Is it too late for that, or is that the government’s policy and one that we’ll see being carried out over the next few weeks and months?"
"1338","Alok Sharma: (19:20);Yeah. Well, thank you for that, Laura. Let me just say a few words before I pass on to Yvonne on this. Of course, people understand across the country why we have put these restrictions in place, and the prime minister was very clear they were for an initial three-week period and we would review them. But what’s also really important is that if we stop these too quickly, there is a possibility that that effort that people have made, that massive effort people have made across the country, is wasted, and we could potentially see a dangerous second peak. We absolutely want to avoid that."
"1339","Alok Sharma: (19:59);But I think it may be helpful, Yvonne, if you want to amplify on this particular point."
"1340","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (19:59);Thank you, Secretary of State. The prime minister has committed to taking review of this after Easter, and I think it’s important to say that we are looking at this through the scientific lens, as well through modeling and through the information we’re getting from clinical cases, as to how this epidemic is progressing. We will be guided by that, Laura. We obviously wanted to make the right call at the right time on this, and it is something that we have to keep reviewing every week. Certainly, we’re very close to SAGE and the modeling on that."
"1341","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (20:31);But in terms of the mass testing, which is your other point here, the testing strategy is to increase the amount of testing done, not just in healthcare workers but in the population. But the rate-limiting step there is not us. It’s really whether the tests are valid, and then to get that out and about, and aided by technology. I think that will change as the phases of this epidemic change. We will perhaps use different techniques. In the beginning, at the containment phase, this was very professional people dependent in the community. We obviously would want this to go faster as we come to a different phase of the epidemic."
"1342","Alok Sharma: (21:16);Thank you for that, Yvonne."
"1343","Alok Sharma: (21:17);We have one final question, which is from BuzzFeed, from Emily Ashton. Emily?"
"1344","Emily Ashton: (21:22);Hi."
"1345","Alok Sharma: (21:23);Hi."
"1346","Emily Ashton: (21:23);This is a question for both of you, I think. NHS frontline workers across the country are showing extraordinary courage in showing up at hospitals day after day in horrific circumstances. You may have seen today a joint statement from trade unions saying the lack of personal protective equipment has become a crisis within a crisis. Workers are being put at unnecessary risk, and also going into work not knowing whether they have been infected by this virus or not, and maybe wondering why we weren’t preparing for testing much earlier. The government keeps offering them warm words, and we’ve heard more of those this evening, but do you accept that you are putting those workers into a dangerous situation and really need to act urgently to keep them safe?"
"1347","Alok Sharma: (22:07);Emily, thank you for that. You’re absolutely right. I pay tribute to the amazing work that NHS staff in the front line across the whole of the NHS and across the public service are doing at this time to support us and support the population."
"1348","Alok Sharma: (22:22);Specifically on the point of PPE, I think as I said in response to an earlier question, over the past two weeks, we have delivered over 390 million PPE products. We have ensured that these are being delivered to every GP practice, to dentists, community pharmacies. There is also now a 24-hour NHS-run hotline where NHS and social care workers can call and request that PPE if it’s needed. Of course, we will continue to do as much as we can, more, to get more of this equipment to the front line, because at the end of the day, you are absolutely right, this is about helping and supporting those who are making a difference in helping and supporting our population."
"1349","Alok Sharma: (23:04);Yvonne?"
"1350","Dr. Yvonne Doyle: (23:05);Thank you, Secretary of State. Emily, it is absolutely our commitment to protect frontline staff, and we are in touch with a wide range of leaders, clinical leaders, nursing leaders, community leaders, and the trade unions, and they are aware of our intention. We are working very rapidly at the moment to ensure that the deliveries reach where they’re needed, and good stocktaking on that, and also that our guidance is easily understood and people understand what they actually need to keep them safe in the circumstances they’re in."
"1351","Alok Sharma: (23:39);Great. Well, thank you very much. I think that was our last question. Could I just end by saying, is that we do request that everybody follows the government guidelines. Ultimately, this is about staying at home, protecting the NHS, and saving the lives, and we will get through this working together. Thank you."
"1352","Matt Hancock: (01:50);Good afternoon and welcome back to Downing Street for today’s coronavirus press briefing. I’m joined by our deputy chief medical officer, Professor Jonathan van Tam and by the chief nurse Ruth May. Our plan is to save as many lives as possible by protecting the NHS and preventing it from being overwhelmed and we’re doing this in two ways."
"1353","Matt Hancock: (02:17);One, by slowing the spread of the virus. That’s why it is so important that people stay at home. And that’s true for everyone who’s watching, how important it is that we stay at home. And two, by boosting the capacity of NHS to care for those who fall sick. That means more beds, more staff, more life saving equipment, and more effective treatments will come on to that. Coronavirus continues its grim march. I could report that through the government’s ongoing monitoring and testing program, according to the latest figures as of this morning, a total of 173,784 people who’ve been tested, of whom 38,168 tested positive. 3,605 people sadly died. And we’re reminded again today that for the NHS, this truly is the front line."
"1354","Matt Hancock: (03:28);In the last 24 hours, two nurses and two healthcare assistants tragically died fighting Coronavirus. Every life lost to this dreadful disease makes me more determined than ever to push for victory. And today, I want to update you with the latest on what we’re doing to boost NHS capacity. So the capacity we have to care is always above the need for that care. First, we’re delivering more critical care beds. This morning, I attended the opening of the new Nightingale Hospital in East London, with Ruth and many others. It was planned, constructed, and fully staffed in just nine days. That is an outstanding achievement and I pay tribute to Ruth and all who’ve been involved in its construction. It shows what’s possible when we come together as one team in one national effort, I pay tribute to the extraordinary work of everyone, the NHS, the military, the construction industry who both donated supplies and of course their expertise, the engineers, the electricians, the plumbers, the caterers, and others all playing their part to build a place of hope and a place of healing."
"1355","Matt Hancock: (04:52);It was really inspiring to go and see the sheer scale of it and the teamwork going on there. And lastly, I want to thank you. I want to thank everyone who is at home because you are giving the NHS the time to expand so that it can save lives. By staying at home, you are saving lives. We have more Nightingale Hospitals planned and on the way in Birmingham and Manchester and Glasgow, and today we’ve announced that we will begin the work on two further Nightingale Hospitals in Bristol and Harrogate. The Bristol Nightingale will have a capacity of up to a 1,000 beds and in Harrogate the capacity of up to 500. The Nightingale Hospitals are not the only expansion we’ve seen across the NHS."
"1356","Matt Hancock: (05:49);Since the start of this crisis, we’ve boosted the number of critical care beds to care for coronavirus by over 2,500. That’s before the addition we’ll get from the Nightingale Hospitals. And the result of this extraordinary work is that in every hospital in the country, we have managed to expand capacity. And as we stand today, over 2,000 critical care beds are free and available and they’re ready should they be needed. And that’s before the Nightingale Hospitals come on stream. And of course, we’re working round the clock to deliver essential deliveries of PPE across the whole NHS, across social care, key public services, and in all four nations of the UK. Yesterday, more than 26 million PPE products delivered to 281 different organizations."
"1357","Matt Hancock: (06:47);And I’ve agreed with the Northern Ireland executive that we will immediately be providing more PPE to Northern Ireland to meet their needs, over 5 million items, including goggles and aprons and masks. Over 7,000 NHS staff have now been tested. And next alongside testing, we’re intensively researching drugs and treatments. Right since the start of this crisis, we’ve been clear that all our plans are based on the best possible science and that science gets better every day. But there’s still a lot that we don’t know about how to treat and potentially prevent COVID-19. So research about treatments is absolutely central to our plan. The UK of course has a long tradition that we’re very proud of, of being the best in the world in this sort of science. And we are a world leader in clinical trials and we’re putting this to use right now, bringing together some of the finest research minds in the country to design new trials and we’re delivering them at record pace as well."
"1358","Matt Hancock: (07:56);We’ve established three national clinical trials covering each major stage of the disease, primary care, hospital care, and critical care for the most seriously ill. And just like the Nightingale, one of these trials was in fact put together in just nine days, which is breathtaking speed. These trials are looking at the effects of existing drugs and steroids repurposed for treatment of COVID-19. One of the trials which is called recovery, which deals in hospital care is the largest of its kind in the world with 926 patients enrolled. We’ve also set up an expert therapeutics task force to search for and shortlist other candidate medicines for trials and I’m advised on that work by my brilliant colleague Jonathan van Tam, the deputy chief medical officer who is one of the finest research scientists of his generation. And Jonathan will say a bit more about in a few minutes."
"1359","Matt Hancock: (08:57);We need more patients to volunteer to be part of these trials because the bigger the trials, the better the data, and the faster we can roll out the treatments, if and only if it’s proven to work. These treatments will help us as the science develops. But for now, the only way to protect yourself and your family from this disease is to stay at home. And of course while this is a national effort to find these treatments, it’s also an international effort, in the same way that we’ve donated more money to the global search for a vaccine than any other country. So too, we will lead the world in the science of these treatments. And whatever we learn, we will share because we are all on the same side in this war."
"1360","Matt Hancock: (09:48);Earlier today I spoke to my counterparts in G7 to coordinate our research efforts over this and other things. And whether it’s treatments or equipment or NHS capacity, we will strain every city. We will move whatever mountains need to be moved. We need everyone to keep playing their part and that includes you. The only way to protect yourselves and others now is to stay at home. The one final thing I want to say is this. We’re set for a warm weekend in some parts of the country, but the disease is still spreading and we absolutely cannot afford to relax the social distancing measures that we have in place. We cannot relax our discipline now."
"1361","Matt Hancock: (10:40);If we do, people will die. So I end with the advice that we all know. This advice is not a request. It is an instruction. Stay at home, protect lives, and then you will be doing your part. I’m now going to hand over to Ruth May, the chief nurse to say a little bit about the Nightingale Hospital and then to Jonathan van Tam to talk about the treatments and the data that we’ve got. Ruth?"
"1362","Ruth May: (11:15);Thank you, Secretary of State. Before I talk about the Nightingale Hospital in London, I want to recognize that today we’ve had the very sad news of the loss of two of my colleagues. We have lost today, Amy [inaudible 00:11:33] and [inaudible 00:11:34], two registered nurses working to protect our public and they sadly have died. My sincere condolences to their families, their friends, and their colleagues because they were one of us. They one of my profession, of the NHS family."
"1363","Ruth May: (11:59);I worry that there’s going to be more and I want to honor them today and recognize their service. So as the Secretary of State said, we were with the [inaudible 00:12:20]. And his Royal Highness, the Prince of Wales, he was joining via video cameras as he opened the first NHS Nightingale Hospital in London. It was an extraordinary feat. People have worked so hard from all sorts of walks of life, all sorts of backgrounds, and they’ve come together as one team to build an NHS hospital. An enormous piece of work, of absolute huge. As the Secretary of State has said, he’s announced two further facilities in Harrogate for the people of the Northeast and in Bristol for the people of the Southwest. And of course that’s long side, Birmingham and Manchester. So thank you to all of our NHS staff, all of our staff across into social care, whether that’s nurses, midwives, doctors, all of them pulling together to make sure that we continue to prepare for COVID-19 surge. I’m grateful for all of our frontline staff and all of our support staff who are caring as a team for sick patients."
"1364","Ruth May: (13:26);I’m very grateful to you, the British public, for your patience and in helping our NHS. As the Secretary of State said, this weekend is going to be very warm and it’s very tempting to go out and enjoy those summer rays. But please, I ask you to remember Amy and [inaudible 00:13:48]. Please stay at home for them."
"1365","Matt Hancock: (13:53);Thank you, Ruth. And Jonathan van Tam, if you could bring us up to speed on the treatments and on the latest data that we have."
"1366","Jonathan Van-Tam: (14:01);Thank you, Secretary of State. I’ll begin with the data-"
"1367","Jonathan Van-Tam: (14:03);and the first slide I want to show you is a survey which shows the behavioral change as of 29th of March in relation to the social-distancing advice that the government has given."
"1368","Jonathan Van-Tam: (14:18);As you can see on the slide, if you begin on the left, there is a small increase in mobility within residential settings. This actually is good because it shows people are staying at home. If you then contrast that with the bars further to the right which move progressively through grocery and pharmacy, through public parks, through workplaces, through transit stations and finally to retail and recreation, you can see progressively larger declines in mobility across the UK. This is really very encouraging indeed and shows that the British public are following the advice that was given, to them but it needs to continue. Next slide, please."
"1369","Jonathan Van-Tam: (15:04);If you then move on and you look at the change in transport use between the 5th of March and just a few days ago, you can see dramatic declines across the piece in total motor vehicles and in use of national rail, buses, and tubes in London. This again is very encouraging. Next slide, please. However, as we have always said, we do not expect these changes to turn the curve on this awful disease immediately. It will take time. As you can see, this slide shows the number of UK cases by day and you can see the numbers are increasing. This remains a dangerous time. It remains vitally important that people continue to stay at home and practice the social distancing that we’ve asked of them, even this weekend as the weather turns warmer. Next slide, please."
"1370","Jonathan Van-Tam: (16:09);You will see a similar picture for hospital admissions, that they are increasing and again, this reinforces the advice we give. The final slide, please."
"1371","Jonathan Van-Tam: (16:22);Shows the comparison of the UK in relation to various other countries. The index is set at the first day in each country when 50 deaths were reported. You can see from this slide that it is a global battle and that the UK is in the same situation in terms of the curve and the shape of the curve as many, many other countries around the world. This is a serious battle. We need to keep fighting it."
"1372","Jonathan Van-Tam: (16:57);I’d now like to talk about clinical trials, if you could take the slide down. Thank you. The first thing I want to say is that this is a new disease where at the moment we do not have any proven treatments. The UK is absolutely determined, however, to find effective treatments for this virus disease. Weeks ago we began to look at clinical trials. We may not have publicized it at that point, but a lot of work has been going on for weeks behind the scenes."
"1373","Jonathan Van-Tam: (17:37);Clinical trials are a gold standard way to discover if a treatment works or not, but saying whether it works or not is rather too simplistic. The treatment has to be effective. It also has to be safe and we also have to understand the right dosage to use, the right patients to give the treatment to, and the right time in the illness to give that treatment. This is complicated stuff and the only way to unpick the signal and make sure we get it right is through clinical trials."
"1374","Jonathan Van-Tam: (18:18);And as my colleague, the secretary of state, has said, there are three trials already up and running in the UK that target different places in the patient pathway from primary care through to critical care. The recruitment rate has been absolutely astonishing, particularly in the recovery trial where we are at 926 patients some three weeks after the trial began. It’s astonishing. It really is a fantastic tribute to the fact that the NHS is getting on with delivering care, but at the same time is committed to finding the right effective treatments."
"1375","Jonathan Van-Tam: (19:02);Now, again, as the secretary of state has said, our initial focus has been on what we call “repurposed medicines,” medicines that are already licensed for some other use or indication. An example would be hydroxychloroquine, which is a malaria drug. Another example in our clinical trials would be a combination of lopinavir and ritonavir, which is an HIV treatment. We are going for the foreground targets in the first instance, where we already have a drug that is licensed. But we’re just not stopping there."
"1376","Jonathan Van-Tam: (19:39);We are determined in the next round of clinical trials to move on to new medicines, ones that are in what we call Phase Two or Phase Three development now possibly for something else but which might have a role to play. We’re going to explore all of those technologies. To do this, we are going to need this therapeutics task force that we have set up to keep an oversight and to coordinate this."
"1377","Jonathan Van-Tam: (20:07);Now, I know that there’ll be a question about when are we going to get some results from these clinical trials. My straight answer to you is, I don’t know. I think it’s going to be a few months, but it will all depend upon how quickly patients are recruited into the trials across the NHS. The faster we go in getting bigger numbers in the trials, the clearer and more emphatic and more granular signals we will get about what works and who it works for."
"1378","Jonathan Van-Tam: (20:42);Thank you, Secretary."
"1379","Matt Hancock: (20:43);Thank you very much. If we now go to questions, the first question is going to be from Hugh Pym of the BBC."
"1380","Hugh Pym: (20:54);Thank you very much. It’s a question actually for Jonathan Van Tam, if I may. When do you expect the peak of the epidemic to be? At that point, will the NHS have enough ventilators to give those who need critical care that care at a time when some patients might fear they won’t be able to get it?"
"1381","Jonathan Van-Tam: (21:14);Thank you for the two questions. The first one is about when we will turn this curve round, when we are going to peak, and when we’re going to come down."
"1382","Jonathan Van-Tam: (21:24);We don’t know the answer to that yet. We have always said that we will know if our social- distancing measures are working a few weeks after we have put them in place. By my quick calculation, we’re at kind of 10 or 11 days at the moment. It’s too soon to say. It will partly depend upon how well those social-distancing measures are adhered to by every one of us, but I hope it will be soon. We are going to watch very carefully to see when we’ve hit the peak and when we’re starting to turn it, but we will not take any premature actions. We’re going to stick with the science and see where it takes us."
"1383","Jonathan Van-Tam: (22:07);Your second question, is kind of related and about how tall the peak will be and whether there will be enough ventilator capacity across the NHS."
"1384","Jonathan Van-Tam: (22:19);I can tell you that I don’t think we’re anywhere close to that kind of scenario at the moment. We will watch it extremely closely and we will make decisions as we need to on a day-by-day basis. But I repeat, we are not anywhere close to the scenario you describe at the moment."
"1385","Matt Hancock: (22:40);Thanks very much. If we go to Robert Peston of ITV. Hi, Robert."
"1386","Robert Peston: (22:46);Afternoon, gentlemen. Firstly, on the clinical trials, Jonathan Van Tam said the success depends to a certain extent on the numbers enrolled in those trials. Was that actually a call to individuals with symptoms to enroll in those trials? Are you looking for volunteers?"
"1387","Robert Peston: (23:03);Secondly, very recently, Patrick Vallance told the health select committee that on the basis of the lag between infections and deaths, he thought there were probably a thousand people in the community with this virus for every death. Does that mean we think that we’re not far off four-million people infected, or have you’ve got a new rule of thumb now that we’re slightly further on?"
"1388","Robert Peston: (23:28);Then, finally, Secretary of State, you’re well aware, because of ministers and people you know, that the range of symptoms you can get with this is very broad indeed. For example, there’s a lot of evidence that losing sense of smell and taste is a symptom. Are you looking at changing the guidelines to people for when they quarantine, because at the moment you’re saying self-isolate if it’s a high fever and a cough, but are you going to add to the list of symptoms where people should start self isolating?"
"1389","Matt Hancock: (24:01);Well, thank you. If I answer some of that and then I’ll cast over to JVT. On the last one, which you addressed directly to me, Robert, it’s a complimentary of you to ask me a scientific medical question, but I’m going to resist the temptation to answer it because we’ve got a proper medical scientist in the room and we are following the science. For me, personally, I did lose my sense of taste and that actually has begin to come back though. I can assure people who have lost their sense of taste that the good news is that that, in my case, wasn’t permanent."
"1390","Matt Hancock: (24:42);On the first point about the clinical trials, the answer is that we are looking for people to sign up to the clinical trials where that’s possible within that hospital and where that is clinically advised. The call really is to the NHS, who are the ones who would make recommendations that somebody would be on a clinical trial."
"1391","Matt Hancock: (25:07);JVC, do you want to add to those two questions and also answer Robert’s middle question on the rate of infection."
"1392","Jonathan Van-Tam: (25:13);Yes. Yes. Thank you very much. I will answer those questions."
"1393","Jonathan Van-Tam: (25:16);On the point about loss of taste and smell and nausea, we have actually asked our expert advisory committee NERVTAG to look at this, and there are some anecdotal data that are now in the published domain that suggests that a proportion of people do indeed lose their sense of taste and smell. However, we have looked at the data that there are in relation to whether that on its own is a symptom that would be important to add to the case definition. The answer to from our experts is absolutely not, that, yes, this is true. Well, as far as we can tell on limited data, it appears to be true, but It doesn’t contribute anything on its own to the overall affinity of the diagnosis."
"1394","Jonathan Van-Tam: (26:11);On the second point about volunteers for clinical trials, people will have read in the newspapers sometimes when a new drug is being tried that there’s an advert and you ring up and you volunteer for the clinical trial. This is a very different scenario. Here, these are about patients who are undergoing treatment at some stage for COVID-19."
"1395","Jonathan Van-Tam: (26:35);First of all, we need the physicians in charge of their care to sign up for the clinical trial and then it is up to the physicians to approach the patient and ask them if they would like to take apart. It’s a process of very careful, written, informed consent for that to happen. But the straight answer is, yes, we do need people to take part in the clinical trials and they are doing. For the recovery trial, yesterday’s figure reported to me was a little over 700 patients into the trial. Today, I’m walking on my way to 10 Downing street and the number comes through of 926. This is really fantastic work by both clinicians and by patients."
"1396","Jonathan Van-Tam: (27:26);On your final point about are there more people out there than we are counting through the case numbers, our testing is based primarily at the moment in hospitals where it is needed most, and there will be further cases out there, people who are isolating in accordance with the guidelines, who have COVID-19 who we have not counted in the official statistics. How large that is, I wouldn’t like to speculate."
"1397","Matt Hancock: (28:00);Any follow-ups to that, Robert?"
"1398","Robert Peston: (28:03);Well, it was simply that-"
"1399","Robert Peston: (28:03);[inaudible 00:28:04] did use a ratio of one to a thousand. I mean, it was a rule of thumb that he thought was useful. Do you have a rule of thumb at the moment? Or do you personally, Jonathan, think that’s not terribly helpful."
"1400","Jonathan Van-Tam: (28:18);It’s not that I don’t think it’s terribly helpful. That’s the official advice we’ve had through the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, but obviously there’s a lot of imprecision associated with those kinds of estimates. And I think it’s probably unhelpful at this point to try and nail it down, as it were."
"1401","Matt Hancock: (28:33);I think that another way to add to that is that pillar four of the testing strategy is having survey tests to try to find the answer to that question as scientifically as possible. And there’s a huge amount of work under way under pillar four. If we go to Sam Coates, from Sky, please."
"1402","Sam Coates: (28:58);Thank you. To Matt Hancock, earlier today, you seem to indicate that you did think that Easter Sunday, April the 12th would be the projected peak for coronavirus deaths, but Jonathan Van-Tam doesn’t seem to quite endorse that when speaking just now. Why is that? What’s going on there?"
"1403","Sam Coates: (29:16);And secondly, to all of you, there are people, some elderly, some disabled, being told by GP’s today that they fit into the category of do not resuscitate. That they wouldn’t be taken to hospital, that they won’t be treated. What do you say to them, to their families? Should they fight those do not resuscitate messages and notices? Or should they just accept what they’re told?"
"1404","Matt Hancock: (29:38);Thank you. On the first one of those, the truth is that we don’t know. I think you’ve over interpreted my comment. I was asked about a suggestion earlier. And I answered the same, which is that we don’t know. And actually, there’s a reason we don’t know. And that was because it depends on how people act. And this is why the absolute central message, the most important message that anybody can take away from this press conference or the entirety of the government’s messaging and how we feel is that you’ve got to stay at home. And I know we repeat this, but it is really important. Because the more people stay at home, the faster that we will get through this."
"1405","Matt Hancock: (30:28);On the question of DNRs, I’ll hand over to Ruth."
"1406","Ruth: (30:35);Yep. Absolutely. So, clinicians, my clinical colleagues have these discussions all of the time with patients and their families thinking about their wishes, thinking about what their care being planned. And that’s right and proper. COVID-19 is no excuse to have those discussions. And in an insensitive way. But these discussions need to happen all of the time with families and with patients themselves. But it needs to be done sensitively. And COVID-19 should not be used as an excuse to do that quite separately."
"1407","Matt Hancock: (31:12);Thanks very much. If we go to Liz Bates of Channel 4. Hi, Liz."
"1408","Liz Bates: (31:17);Hi. If I could direct my questions primarily at Matt Hancock. First of all, you hugely based expectations when you said 3.5 million antibody tests had been ordered and would be widely available. Now you’re saying they don’t work? Are these tests ever going to materialize."
"1409","Liz Bates: (31:37);And secondly, if I may, countries which have carried out more tests and the U.K. Have had fewer deaths per million. Has the decision to carry out fewer tests than places like Germany and South Korea cost lives here?"
"1410","Matt Hancock: (31:52);Thanks. I can take both those questions. We have provisionally ordered 17 and a half million, not three and a half million antibody tests. But, as I’ve been absolutely clear all along, we’ll only use them if they work. And, in fact, on the G7 call earlier, it’s clear that no G7 country has yet found a home antibody test, which is pillar three of the testing strategy, that works. But we continue to search for one. Again, this is an area where the science is constantly developing. And there’s a huge amount of global effort going into finding one of these tests that does work. But I’ve also been clear that we’re putting the orders in place so that, should they work, then we can get them here in the U.K."
"1411","Matt Hancock: (32:41);And on the second point, can you remind me of the second question?"
"1412","Liz Bates: (32:50);That we haven’t tested."
"1413","Matt Hancock: (32:52);It was about the numbers testing. Yeah. The truth is, we’ve had a clear ramp up in testing as part of the strategy from the start. We had just under 2,000 tests a day a month ago. I set the goal of reaching 10,000 a day. And we have reached that. And we hit that on target at the end of March. And now, we’ve got the clear goal of 100,000 tests a day by the end of April."
"1414","Matt Hancock: (33:24);There are countries that have tested more than us, like Germany as you mentioned. But there’s others, like France, that haven’t tested as much as us. The question of the correlations is a very complicated one with lots of factors in it. I don’t know if you want to add anything, JVT."
"1415","Jonathan Van-Tam: (33:43);Yeah. So, I would add just something, Secretary of State, on the quality of tests. It’s absolutely vitally important. Any test in medicine, any test is never a hundred percent accurate. That is a truism. And the wrong antibody test that isn’t accurate is going to say to some people you have antibodies when you don’t. It is also going to say to another selection of the population. You are not immune when you are. And so, it’s really important that these are rigorously evaluated so that the tolerances on those error rates are very low, indeed. And we have to get that right before we can even think about how we can use these antibody tests in the most advantageous and informative way for everyone."
"1416","Matt Hancock: (34:40);Thanks very much. Andy Bell, Channel 5."
"1417","Andy Bell: (34:44);Thank you very much. A quick follow up to you, Mr. Hancock, a follow up to Liz’s question. Have we spent any money on those 17 million tests we’ve ordered? And then, a question for professor Van-Tam, twice this week. One of your colleagues, Steven Powers from NHS England, has talked about seeing green shoots. Is that the way you would characterize what you’re seeing at the moment in the data?"
"1418","Matt Hancock: (35:09);Well, on the first question, of course. The samples that we’ve got in, we’ve needed to pay for those samples because they’re being tested. But what matters here really is these tests. If we can get them, if they’re accurate, if they can work, if we’ve got the confidence in them that we can use them, then the positive impact that will have on people, knowing with confidence that they can get back to normal life more quickly, will vastly outweigh any cost. So, of course, cost is a consideration, but frankly getting a test that works, it is worth more than just more than just money. JVT."
"1419","Jonathan Van-Tam: (35:56);Thank you. On the green shoots, the answer to your question is, where you look for them. I absolutely see green shoots. I really do in terms of the massive change in public behavior that’s already taken place. If that continues, for as long as the government asks for it to continue, then they really will be quite big green shoots in the end."
"1420","Jonathan Van-Tam: (36:24);However, if you’re asking me about the health care hospital admission data, then I think it is too early to make any kind of interpretation such as that. There will be day to day variations in the number of hospital admissions that occur as a feature of near random chance. And so, one mustn’t interpret the data. One needs to be patient and look for a long term trend."
"1421","Matt Hancock: (36:53);Thanks very much. We’re going to go to Martin Brown of The Express. Hi, Martin."
"1422","Martin Brown: (36:59);Hi there. Thank you. Mr. Hancock, can I ask what measures, what help is being given to the mental wellbeing of thousands of patients who are in hospital on their own, many of whom are sadly dying without their loved ones by their side? And the same goes also for pregnant women, as well, women giving birth. What help is being given to their mental wellbeing?"
"1423","Martin Brown: (37:23);And for the medical experts, can I just ask, is there any benefit in wearing a face mask, the public wearing face masks when they go outside? Countries such as Japan, South Korea, Singapore where the use of face masks is more prevalent in the public, they seem to have lower levels of infections and deaths from coronavirus."
"1424","Matt Hancock: (37:45);Thanks, Martin. I really worry about the impact of coronavirus on the mental health of those who are badly affected. And I really feel for those who have seen their loved ones die and not been able to be with them at the end. And I think it’s a really difficult issue that we have to make sure that we support people with compassion and understanding for what they’re going through."
"1425","Matt Hancock: (38:17);We have put five million pounds into Support Mind to help people with the impact of coronavirus on their mental health. But this is going to be, I think, an issue of increasing importance as the crisis goes on. I’m going to ask Ruth to say something about that, and also about the maternity question. And then, if JVT answers the second question. Ruth."
"1426","Ruth: (38:43);Thank you very much. I was only on a phone call this morning to Sebastian, who is a doctor, a medical colleague of mine. And he had lost his father from COVID-19. And hearing his story about the extraordinary lengths that the nurses, the matron on that night shift had gone to to make sure that they were able to connect a conversation with his brother in Singapore, to be able to connect, to make sure the battery was fully charged for his dad to be able to have numerous phone calls."
"1427","Ruth: (39:15);I am seeing, across the United Kingdom, nurses, midwives, the whole of our clinical teams going to extraordinary lengths to make sure we absolutely do that. And whilst we know that visiting has been reduced to the absolute limit, it is also… we are saying that visitors are able to go, of course, for people end of life care. But technology is really important. But looking on the wellbeing of our patients is really important, but also wellbeing of our staff. We need to make sure that we’re assessing out measures to look after our staff as well."
"1428","Ruth: (39:48);I didn’t get quite the maternity question, Secretary of State. So, would you mind repeating that one?"
"1429","Martin Brown: (39:55);It was just the same really. What help is being given to the women who are alone in hospital without their loved ones giving birth."
"1430","Ruth: (40:06);Well, I’m very fortunate to work with professor Jackie Dunkley-Bent, our chief midwifery officer who provides enormous, fantastic midwifery leadership across England. What she’s been telling me is that midwives, yes, again, are doing exactly the same. They’re going to extraordinary lengths to make sure they’re using technology, using Zoom, using all of the technology to make sure people are connected. There’s been plenty of people that are doing just that to make sure that families can get together, when they can, safely to connect with their new members of their families."
"1431","Matt Hancock: (40:39);Thanks, Ruth. On the second question, JVT."
"1432","Jonathan Van-Tam: (40:41);Yeah. I’ll just begin on the first, actually, to say, I realize this is an awful and distressing illness. And I’m very distressed personally when I hear these stories of families separated, when I hear everything that’s going on in that space. It’s really terrible."
"1433","Jonathan Van-Tam: (41:01);But to your evidence point about face masks and wearing of face masks by the general public, this has been a controversial area in pandemic preparedness and planning for the 15 years that I’ve been involved in it. And, indeed, I was on the phone this morning to a colleague in Hong Kong who is a professor there who has done the evidence review for the World Health Organization on face masks. And we’re of the same mind that there is no evidence that general wearing of face masks by the public who are well affects the spread of the disease in our society. What matters right now, of course, is social distancing. And yes, it is true that we do see very large amounts of mask wearing, particularly in Southeast Asia. But we have always seen that for many decades-"
"1434","Jonathan Van-Tam: (42:03);…and it is entirely wired into some cultures that masks are worn quite frequently in open spaces. So it’s very different, but in terms of the hard evidence and what the UK government recommends, we do not recommend face masks for general wearing by the public."
"1435","Matt Hancock: (42:24);Thanks very much. I hope that answers the question, Martin. Pretty clear. Dan Martin from The Mail."
"1436","Dan Martin: (42:32);Mr. Hancock, you said that if people don’t obey the rules, you would consider toughening the lockdown that’s in place at the moment. In France, they’re stationing police in railway stations and installing multiple checkpoints to check where people are going. Is that the sort of thing we might see happening here? To the scientists, the Institute of Biomedical Science has come out today to say that the April target is practically impossible because they don’t have the equipment and chemicals they need. Are you concerned about that?"
"1437","Matt Hancock: (42:59);Thank you very much. We rule nothing out in terms of further social distancing if that is needed or further enforcement of social distancing. However, the British public are, in a very large part, following the new rules, and the police are policing them largely with their normal consent-based attitude and approach. I pay tribute to the police because bringing in a new set of rules like this in short order does, of course, provide a challenge to the police, and I think that they have risen to that challenge."
"1438","Matt Hancock: (43:41);On the second question of the testing, we’re absolutely determined to hit the new goal of 100,000 a tests a day under all five pillars of the testing strategy that I set out. Yes, that will involve some challenges. There’s no doubt, including making sure we get hold of all of the parts, for instance, and all of the reagents."
"1439","Matt Hancock: (44:06);Everybody can see that there are challenges around the world in terms of increasing testing, but we’re determined that we’re going to get there, and this is going to have to be a national effort in which not only my team and the people at Public Health England and across the NHS, but the whole life sciences industry is going to have to play a part."
"1440","Matt Hancock: (44:27);I’ve been really delighted by the response since I set that challenge down at this press conference yesterday, and more people have come forward saying that they can turn their capabilities to increasing testing. We’re going to have to hit that target. JVT, I don’t know whether you want to add."
"1441","Jonathan Van-Tam: (44:47);No, Secretary of State. I think you’ve answered the question."
"1442","Matt Hancock: (44:50);Have you got any follow-up, Dan? Is that okay?"
"1443","Dan Martin: (44:53);That’s fine. Thanks."
"1444","Matt Hancock: (44:54);Okay, good stuff. Martin Bagot from The Mirror. Hello."
"1445","Martin Bagot: (44:59);Hi, good afternoon. Secretary of State, at yesterday’s briefing when you promised 100,000 daily tests by the end of the month, you seemed to acknowledge only 25,000 of these were likely to be the more urgent in need antigen test, which can tell if a patient currently has the virus. The Prime Minister promised 25,000 daily antigen tests last month, and now delivering on this appears to have been delayed until the end of April. Can you acknowledge today that we expect the peak to come in the next fortnight and Germany is increasing the antigen tests from 70,000 a day? Do you think this could come too little, too late?"
"1446","Martin Bagot: (45:33);Secondly, could we have some clarification on the national lockdown guidance on the eve of what looks like being a sunny weekend? Given many families don’t have access to a garden, can people spend time in green spaces, for example, having a picnic for an hour, so long as they are in household groups? Or is it just a case of jog or walk for an hour and then go home?"
"1447","Matt Hancock: (45:52);All right. Thanks very much, Martin. Just on the first one, I want to be crystal clear that the goal that I set yesterday was 100,000 tests per day over all five pillars of the testing strategy. Pillar one, which has brought us to 10,000 tests per day, that is set and was always set to get to 25,000 by the end of April. But pillar two, which is bringing in the private companies to also deliver, that is part of the goal, as is pillar three, which is the antigen test to see whether you have the virus, pillar four, which is the research, and pillar five, which is the national effort to bring companies that haven’t hitherto been involved in testing into this great challenge."
"1448","Matt Hancock: (46:42);So we, in fact, increased the goal for the end of April from about 25,000 to 100,000. Then we will go on to meet the target that the Prime Minister has previously set out of eventually 250,000 tests a day. It was all, as I set out yesterday, answering that specific question."
"1449","Matt Hancock: (47:10);On the question about what people should do over the weekend, it is incredibly important that people follow the guidelines. I know that it’s going to be sunny, and it may be tempting, but it’s staying at home that saves lives, and I think we should just be absolutely crystal clear about that. The guidelines have been set out in terms of people going out for exercise reasons either on their own or with people in their household. People need to stick to the guidelines, and we’re going to stick with those guidelines. Thanks very much, Martin. Jen Williams from the Manchester Evening News. Hi, Jen."
"1450","Jen Williams: (47:50);All right. Thank you. A couple of questions for the Health Secretary from me. We’re getting reports here and there’ve been reports elsewhere as well of care homes being told that their residents may not be admitted to hospital if they have suspected coronavirus. There have already been cases where a significant number of people in a single care home have died including [inaudible 00:00:48:08]. Is there a blanket policy across the system not to admit care home residents into hospital?"
"1451","Jen Williams: (48:14);Secondly, also on social care, there are growing concerns with insufficient PPE and testing for infection as a whole. Counselors are now having to source their own, but are finding that they’re facing escalating prices. There are fears more broadly that sufficient care has not been prioritized at the national level. So is social care an afterthought in this?"
"1452","Jen Williams: (48:33);Just finally, on PPE as a whole, how many units do we have in the national stockpile, and how many are we expected to need during the course of the outbreak?"
"1453","Matt Hancock: (48:43);Okay. Thank you very much indeed for those three questions. The first one on care homes, it is absolutely not a blanket rule that people shouldn’t go to hospital from care homes. Hospital is there for people when they need it and when the doctors advise that they go. We have 2,029 spare critical care beds in the NHS right now, 2,029. That is before we bring on stream the Nightingale hospitals, and that is testament to the NHS who have done amazing work. They’ve already expanded the number of critical care beds by two and a half thousand for COVID-19 patients."
"1454","Matt Hancock: (49:31);So there is capacity in the hospitals right now to deal with COVID-19, and there is no blanket rule. It is a clinical judgment about when somebody goes to hospital. I don’t know if Ruth might want to add something on that."
"1455","Matt Hancock: (49:47);On the PPE question we have millions of pieces of PPE in the stockpile, and I can make sure that we get the exact figure to you. I haven’t got it on me, but we are also replenishing it all the time. Because whilst we have a very large stockpile, we are also using it. So we’ve got to make sure that we replenish it, and we’re replenishing it both from buying internationally, where much of it traditionally, has been made and also making it domestically."
"1456","Matt Hancock: (50:23);I’ll give a shout out to Burberry who’ve turned over their production to the production of gowns to add to the stockpile and to get PPE to people who need it, which is another part of the national effort. I think Burberry deserve the credit for what they’ve done so far for the nation and hopefully lots more Burberry gowns to come. Ruth, I don’t know if you want to add."
"1457","Ruth May: (50:48);Two points. Thank you very much, Secretary of State. So about the care homes, my mother-in-law, Millie, lives in a care home, and that is her home. So clinicians from whatever background will make a decision based on the clinical need of that person as to whether they need hospital care because that’s the important part. With regard to social care, I know that out of the 6,000 nurses that are coming back onto our emergency register, some of those are opting to go into social care. I am delighted to see that we’re offering people the option of coming into our hospitals, coming into our primary care setting but also into social care, and I’m going to be woefully sure that we continue to do that over the next few weeks too."
"1458","Matt Hancock: (51:35);Okay. Does that answer the question, Jen?"
"1459","Jen Williams: (51:35);Yeah, it does. But on the PPE, I mean, obviously you said you’d come back on the numbers in terms of how many you’ve got in the stockpile. But do you know how many you’re going to need over the course of the pandemic?"
"1460","Matt Hancock: (51:45);Well, it depends how long the pandemic lasts. But at the moment we are distributing many millions of pieces every day. In the last 24 hours it was 26 million. Over the last couple of weeks it’s around 400 million. So you can see that we’re getting through it fast, and so we’re replenishing it at the other end as fast as we can. But the challenge in PPE is a challenge of distribution rather than a challenge of having the stock."
"1461","Matt Hancock: (52:15);I also didn’t answer your question about social care with PPE because it’s incredibly important to me that we get the protective equipment that we need to people working in social care as well as in the NHS and all parts of the NHS. The new PPE guidance that we set out yesterday, which has got very broad support, that sets out what sort of PPE is appropriate in what sort of setting, and we will deliver that PPE into social care."
"1462","Matt Hancock: (52:49);I know that it’s a challenge not least because there’s around 26,000 social care settings, a combination of care homes and organizations that provide care in people’s homes, and so it is more complicated than delivering to the NHS. But the priority of getting the right PPE to social care is exactly the same as the priority of getting the right PPE to the NHS, and that’s what the system, with the support of the military, is doing."
"1463","Matt Hancock: (53:16);Thank you very much indeed. I think that’s all we’ve got time for today, but no doubt there’ll be more to come in these daily press conferences. I am very grateful to all of the questions, and I’m very grateful to both Jonathan Van-Tam and Ruth May for answering the questions with me. Thanks very much indeed."
"1464","Alex Thomson: (00:08);What exactly does that mean? So if people continued to ignore your social distancing rule, what does tightening up the measures actually in practical terms mean?"
"1465","Matt Hancock: (00:17);Well, we’re not planning any changes to those rules imminently, but we do absolutely require people to follow them. And we have had these questions about the boundaries of the rules and people pushing the boundaries. But as Jenny just set out, there’s very clear reasons that we set the rules as they are and we want people to follow those rules. And of course there’s now the police enforce against them. They’re not rules that anybody would want to have in place, but they’re rules that need to be in place and everybody must follow them and stay at home wherever possible unless for those four reasons. And we’re crystal clear about that. And we’ve set those rules, we’re enforcing against those rules and we reiterate those rules because that is the best way to be able to bend the curve down and stop the spread of the virus. Alex Thomson from Channel 4."
"1466","Alex Thomson: (01:18);Well, good afternoon to you both. You’ll both be aware that in the last few hours an urgent directive has gone out to NHS ICU doctors to the effect that if hospitals are using a lot of oxygen machines, the entire oxygen supplied to the hospital can fail from C-PAP face mask ventilators right through to operating theaters. So what has been done to address that critical problem and more widely, we understand three hospitals in the past few days have come close and these are running out of oxygen. What’s being done to increase supplies to ensure that doesn’t happen in the coming days and weeks when clearly the number of patients will increase?"
"1467","Matt Hancock: (02:00);Yes, this is a very important operational question. We have adequate supplies of the oxygen that’s needed in hospitals. We need to of course, make sure that each hospital has that available. We have had an equipment failure as I think you referenced and we therefore had to divert some ambulances, but this is the normal operation of the NHS when there are things like equipment failures. Of course interest in it is heightened because of the nature of coronavirus but the supply, the quantity of oxygen and supply of oxygen is something that we’ve been working very hard on and we have a very high degree of confidence in the supply of oxygen."
"1468","Jenny Harries: (02:45);So I was just going to add actually some comments that I think Professor Steve Paris made a few days ago, which is actually to signal that this is a positive sign in most cases. If you have a whole system where it’s unusual in the UK where we have a national health service, it means that we have a system of flagging where there are potential risks or problems before they actually become a significant problem. It is a strength of our system that we have these flags going off at regular intervals. And I think his comment back to the questions at the time was, “This is a positive thing. We flag them, we deal with them as they arise.” But to reinforce what the secretary state has said is there is no insufficiency of oxygen and I think the public should not be concerned that if they become ill and need a hospital admission, that care is available to them."
"1469","Matt Hancock: (03:37);Okay, great. Charlotte Ivers from talkRADIO."
"1470","Charlotte Ivers: (03:41);Thank you Mr. Hancock. You changed and updated the rules on PPE a few days ago and I was being to a doctor who said before these changes, he was moving between treating COVID patients and cancer patients who were… had compromised immune systems and he was terrified that he would be deadly to them because he didn’t feel it was adequate. So can I ask you firstly, was he correct to be scared and if he wasn’t correct to be scared, why has something had to change?"
"1471","Matt Hancock: (04:11);Well, we’ve changed the upgraded the guidance. So now in all instances it’s at or above the levels of protective equipment recommended by the World Health Organization. But we’ve also upgraded it following more being known about the virus. As we learned about the science of coronavirus over the last few months. So we will keep upgrading and improving guidance as we learn more about it. So that was the main reason for the changes to make sure that we reflected the latest that we know about the virus and I think that the new guidance set out on Thursday has been very widely welcomed and provides clarity about what protective equipment is needed in which circumstance. And then of course we have to deliver and make sure that that protective equipment that is needed according to the guidance gets to the frontline. Jenny?"
"1472","Jenny Harries: (05:14);Yeah. So I think just to support that, I don’t know the individual case that you are describing, but clearly it wouldn’t matter whether you were a cancer patient or a patient in another setting. We want to maintain good infection prevention control procedures and the bedrock of that in the UK and throughout the NHS is actually systematic practice. It’s one reason why this country is very good. We don’t get a lot of nosocomial infection as an onward spread in healthcare settings because it is the basics, which we are also obviously been teaching the public around a good hand and respiratory hygiene in a systematic approach and using PPE carefully, which keeps that at bay. But I think the new guidance there, what it has done is it’s reinforced the fact that our guidance previously was actually inconsistent with WHO guidance. It was endorsed, it was a report, I think back on the 27th by WHO and recognized."
"1473","Jenny Harries: (06:11);But what we’re seeing now is a slightly different prevalence of disease and we’ve adapted our guidance to manage that. So there’s a level of uncertainty and there’s a level of protection which is higher in some high-risk procedures. So the areas we’re very concerned about from a clinical perspective are what we call aerosol generating procedures under pressure. So this is where somebody, where you get a potential airborne spread and we want to make sure people have absolutely adequate protection there. And then the other issue is recognizing the settings in which people are working. So the most obvious one would be if we went back say four months, very unlikely anybody in the emergency department would see anybody with COVID-19. Actually now in some of those settings where it’s uncertain for professionals in when they’re first seeing patients and understanding them, it’s important that they have COVID in anticipation of what might be a different prevalence of disease. So that’s basically, I can give you more detail of the actual equipment, but that’s as effectively what we’re trying to do is covering the changing circumstances."
"1474","Matt Hancock: (07:22);Did you have a follow-up? You put your hand up?"
"1475","Charlotte Ivers: (07:25);Yes. I was just going to ask you talks about us now knowing more about the disease. So knowing what we know now, should we have had these higher levels of protection from the beginning? Were people at risk?"
"1476","Matt Hancock: (07:36);Well the thing is that you can only make decisions based on the information that you have at the time. And we’re constantly looking for new information about this disease so that we can improve the guidance that we have and the response that we have to it. The question that we have in government and that I ask myself every day is, are we doing the right thing now and what can we change to improve our response for the future? And so you can have a debate about the past but you have to take decisions on the information that’s available at the time. And I think the previous guidance was the best guidance possible on the information that was available at the time. And then we’ve upgraded it."
"1477","Jenny Harries: (08:22);So I think to support that, it’s not so much we are obviously learning all the time about the disease, but the basic guidance was entirely appropriate and as I say, endorsed by WHO despite I think some media reporting about differences. But the important thing is we are now operating in a slightly different environment. So it’s the uncertainty that some clinicians, not all clinicians find themselves in that we have reviewed where that is to ensure that they feel safer in those environments."
"1478","Jenny Harries: (08:52);I think there are other opportunities we’re learning from. So for example, where we are finding that you can reuse masks safely, for example, with appropriate cleaning and technology. That’s very helpful because of course we need to keep in mind that regardless of supplies and advice, the whole world wants personal protective equipment and it’s really important that we all use it appropriately and judiciously, exactly have it in the right places where it’s needed but not be wasting it so that the people who are working on the front line, whether it be in care homes, domiciliary care, or in the front line of an emergency department, they have the right PPE at the right time for the right clinical risk and that’s what our whole basis of the guidance is based upon."
"1479","Matt Hancock: (09:41);Thanks very much Jane Merrick at the i."
"1480","Jane Merrick: (09:46);Thank you. How do you square what the queen says today about the nation’s attributes of self-discipline with your warning about having to toughen the restrictions of people, don’t stop gathering and parks? That’s to the health secretary and to the chief, the deputy chief medical officer. What is the testing strategy for care homes and prisons given that these are emerging as a major hotspots for cases and sadly deaths? Are prisons and care homes going to be next in line for mass testing after NHS workers?"
"1481","Matt Hancock: (10:15);Well, I think we’re all looking forward to seeing what the queen has to say and watching her address and listening very carefully to it. I think the message from all of those of us in it across the board is very clear, which is that we need perseverance in the face of some great challenges and that also means the perseverance in following the rules. And I couldn’t be clearer about my emphatic requirement of people, which is backed up by law to follow the rules that we’ve set out and to make sure that people stay at home. That is the number one thing that you can do. And we’ve set out those four exemptions and people should stay at home unless they’re going out for one of those four reasons and those four reasons alone. Jenny."
"1482","Jenny Harries: (11:10);Thank you. So absolutely. You’ve highlighted two very critical and domains if you like, for public health surveillance and intervention. That’s been recognized right from the start of this incident and in fact is recognized before COVID-19. We always keep a close eye on care homes and prisons because the setting in which people live is potentially problematic. So the care homes, clearly you tend to have a collection in the nicest possible use of the word of potentially elderly or more vulnerable individuals. That’s one issue. And then certainly in prisons you are intentionally through a prison operation holding people together. So both of those environments are very well recognized. In fact, Public Health England hosts the WHO Collaborating Centre for healthy prisons. So we have a lot of experience and actually advise other parts of the world. And I know that the key consultants there have been working with ministry of justice and with the prime minister on establishing and looking at what have those environments should be treated."
"1483","Jenny Harries: (12:19);You asked specifically about testing and testing in both prisons and care homes has always been on the priority list. So once we moved from containment to delay, if you remember the categories of testing that we have our clinical care of patients in hospitals as an absolute category because that’s how we manage the safety and the benefit of that health intervention, but what we then do is test in care homes and prisons. What we do do though is we wouldn’t necessarily test everybody because you want to test whether it’s going to be a positive advantage to doing the testing. I’ll stop in a moment and we usually test up to about five people to establish… It can vary depending on the setting but to be sure that we have established what the issue is. It’s usually quite possible in a setting like that to understand then on a clinical basis whether there is a case, it may not be laboratory confirmed but it would be a presumed clinical case."
"1484","Jim: (13:22);Thanks very much. Jim at the FT."
"1485","Jane Merrick: (13:25);Sorry."
"1486","Matt Hancock: (13:25);Oh sorry. You wanted to come back Jane, sorry."
"1487","Jane Merrick: (13:28);Wanted to come back on the question on testing that you said that they are next in line, but when will that testing take place? Given that there are probably lots of people who are very concerned about their relatives and care homes and also the people who work in care homes and people who work in prisons."
"1488","Jenny Harries: (13:42);Yeah, so sorry to perhaps I didn’t explain myself clearly enough. So for any care home outbreaks, whether it relates to a worker or an individual resident or a prisoner or somebody supporting him or her, those tests happen now they are in the prioritized list already. So the groups of people who are routinely tested and have been ever since we have started responding to this incident include potential outbreaks in care homes and prisons. That’s been going on right from the start. In terms of other workers there as we go forward for NHS workers and front-line care workers and responders, clearly those are in the priority group because we recognize that those workers, we need to think of the care sector almost like the other arm. We talk a lot about the acute hospital sector, but we often forget that it’s the care sector who are operating in the community, community nurses and domiciliary care workers who are equally important in our drive to manage this incident. So they will come within prioritized key workers."
"1489","Matt Hancock: (14:49);Does that answer the question Jane?"
"1490","Jane Merrick: (14:54);I think it was just to get clarity on when that testing would take place for those workers. If there’s no specific timing."
"1491","Jenny Harries: (15:00);So the outbreaks happen already and the other workers will be falling into the expanding program which has been ramping up as you’ve heard and I think has been reported on a daily basis this week."
"1492","Matt Hancock: (15:12);Thanks Jim from the FT."
"1493","Jim: (15:17);Secretary of state could you please tell us yes or no, whether the government is preparing to take equity stakes on taxpayer’s behalf and some of the large companies which have found themselves in major crisis because of the pandemic. And if so, do you think that Richard Branson’s Virgin Atlantic is a worthy recipient of that kind of assistance given that in 2017 Virgin Care sued your beloved NHS after losing the contracts and given that, so Richard lives as a tax exile on Necker Island. And the question for Jenny Harris, I know you might say it’s too early to speculate about how the lockdown might end. The new focus seems to suggest this morning that there could be a kind of staggered way of doing it in terms of different age groups and different regions coming out to the lockdown before others. Is that-"
"1494","Jim: (16:03);… and different regions coming out of the lockdown before others. Is that possible?"
"1495","Matt Hancock: (16:05);Well, I’m going to not answer the first question and then Jenny can answer the second one. My response to the first question is this is an area in which Rishi Sunak has been doing unbelievable work. He’s recognized around the world for the first class economic response that we’ve got here in the UK. And overall, from the protection of workers, the protection of self employed right across the board they’ve taken the right steps and I think done it with remarkable speed. Of course there’s enormous economic consequences for businesses of all sectors. Of the decisions that we’ve had to take. And no, these decisions on social distancing aren’t the sorts of decisions anybody would want to take."
"1496","Matt Hancock: (16:54);But, I think the way that the prime minister and chancellor have responded on the economic front has been absolutely first rate and I’ll leave it to them to answer questions about the details of what might or might not happen. Which their best place to do rather than me. Jenny on the second point."
"1497","Dr. Jenny Harries: (17:14);Thank you, yes. I think the brief answer is all things are possible. It’s important because right from the start, we’ve driven the response from science and we have modeled. Neil clearly has been one of the key contributors to that modeling group and in us understanding what interventions we need to put in at what time. I know there’s a huge amount of work ongoing at the moment looking at both the individual packets of intervention that have gone in. So we’ve staggered them in. Some of them had significantly more impact on the way in and those are the ones that we put in at the time to give the maximum benefit."
"1498","Dr. Jenny Harries: (17:54);But clearly what we don’t yet know, and I think this is critical. I didn’t hear Neil’s interview this morning, I apologize. But what we don’t yet know is how the disease on a whole population basis has affected our immunity, how many of us have had it and how many haven’t. And that is important. If we can find that information because it will give us an understanding then, as he has obviously described, by region for example. So London has had a lot of cases here. If it was found that a large number of people would immune them, it may be that different interventions could come off sooner or later."
"1499","Dr. Jenny Harries: (18:35);Equally, if we find that there are areas where there have been less cases prevalent, then we need to be very mindful what would happen if the social interaction levels increased in those particular areas, and what the impact might be. As you will have heard many people say before, the very last thing we want to do is have put in all of this effort with everybody trying to do the right thing, almost everybody, across the country, and then find we lift the lid too early and we have a second spike. It will waste the effort that we’ve put in and we still need to get over that very first hump really of the epidemic curve, and then look at detail. But I can assure you, there is a huge amount of work involved in that and Neil clearly has contributing to it."
"1500","Matt Hancock: (19:23);Thanks Jim. The next question from Harriet at the PA. Hi."
"1501","Harriet: (19:30);Hi, to the [inaudible 00:19:31] first, many people here have spent the last couple of weeks obeying [inaudible 00:19:34] and socially distancing themselves. We’re wondering if it’s safe for them to see family if they’ve also been following the guidance over the Easter weekend. Are they safe to do that? And if not, can you explain why not given that surely the chances of them having Corona virus are now very small?"
"1502","Harriet: (19:51);And to Dr. Harrie, as we know that the testing isn’t showing the true picture of the current spread of the virus. How many people do you estimate have had or currently have the Corona virus in the UK?"
"1503","Matt Hancock: (20:03);Well thanks Harriet. The answer to the first question is really clear which is that this virus can spread in all sorts of different ways. Both from directly respiratory and also through objects and through touching objects that others then touch. The uncertainty over who has it, especially before they have symptoms, means that the only effective way of bending the curve down is to reduce that social contact. And that’s why we came to the conclusions that we did, the difficult conclusions, that we have to have such extraordinary social distancing policies in place. And why we took the decision more than a week ago now to flip the basis of those rules from saying you can’t do certain things to saying you must stay at home unless you’re doing one of a small number of things, four things. Which we’ve been absolutely crystal clear about those rules and the evidence shows that a very high proportion of the public understand those rules and a very high proportion of the public are following those rules. We need everybody to be following those rules. And that’s why we talk about them so much and the importance of following them. On the other question."
"1504","Dr. Jenny Harries: (21:30);So I might just add to the Secretary of State’s comments actually on that. Because I think sometimes people get slightly confu-… Their inter mixing if you like the phrase family with household. That’s quite an important difference. So in infection control or public health terms, it is a household which is really important. So for example, if you’re a group of students and you probably will be home with your family in one household now. But previously you might have had five students living in a flat. Under one roof, sharing cooking, bathrooms, all sorts of things. That in infection control terms is a household. So the important thing here is we know that households tend to have the same risk exposures. So they tend to have the same opportunity to become infected from one another. And it’s one of the reasons why we have the stay at home family isolation policy. It’s a household isolation policy."
"1505","Dr. Jenny Harries: (22:27);So if your family is with you, the likelihood that one of you have had it, particularly after you’ve all waited 14 days, then probably your risk is low. It’s possible that one of you may have had it, not noticed any symptoms particularly. But if your family lives in a different town, they are an entirely different household. And mixing those two is not what we want to do generally. So I think the difference between family and household. So it’s stay with the people that you live under the same roof with and keep doing that for as long as you can and safely. So that really just answered to that from an infection control perspective."
"1506","Dr. Jenny Harries: (23:07);And I can’t answer your second question and I’m not going to try. Because that is exactly why we need to understand the immune picture across the population. Obviously some countries are a bit ahead of us. So somewhere like China, other countries, we learn where we can from reports that they do and we’re looking. But there is no country in the world currently which has good population based serology testing for immunity to be able to say with confidence how many of the population have had the disease and which layers. Which ages, which sexes or which people with different characteristics. We just need to understand that in the future. So I won’t hesitate a guess at this point."
"1507","Matt Hancock: (23:56);Does that answer your question, Harriet? Or at least explain why we’re not able to answer it?"
"1508","Harriet: (24:01);Yeah, just to clarify so people who have only been going to the shops or only going out for exerciser are still at risk of having Corona virus, having picked it up and those sorts of things you’re saying. And therefor aren’t safe to travel even by car and see family or friends."
"1509","Matt Hancock: (24:16);That’s right. I have a particular interest in this having had Corona virus and having come through it. Obviously I’ve asked all these questions for myself and as well as Secretary of State. The rules are there for a reason, even for those of us who’ve had it. Where the science predicts it’s likely that our immunity is higher and our ability to transmit the virus is lower, we are not yet confident enough in how much higher the immunity is and how much lower the likelihood of those of us who’ve had the disease transmitting it is, to be able to change the rules. So there is clarity on the social distancing rules for people whether they’ve had Corona virus or not. And the rules are the same for everyone and will be until the science an give us confidence that we can say something different to those who have been through it."
"1510","Matt Hancock: (25:18);Final question. Paris from the Scotsman."
"1511","Paris: (25:22);Thank you Secretary of State. In the past few hours we’ve learned that the chief medical officer of Scotland, Dr. Catherine Calderwood for the past two weekends has driven over 40 miles to a holiday home taking with her on one occasion, her entire family and on the other occasion her husband. How damaging is that to your efforts to convince the public to stay home and save lives? If Dr. Calderwood worked for you Mr. Hancock, would you have asked her for her resignation?"
"1512","Paris: (25:50);And can I ask Dr. Harries, is she still an effective spokes person for the public information campaign and do you have a second home that you’ve visited since movement restrictions came into place?"
"1513","Matt Hancock: (26:03);Well thanks very much, Paris. This is a matter for the Scottish government. They I know are addressing the questions that have been asked in Scotland. These rules are there for everyone. We couldn’t be clearer the social distancing rules are there for everyone to follow. I understand that the Scottish CMO has apologized and as far as I see it, that is a matter for the Scottish government to address. Thanks very much everybody. That is it for today. I hope that you, like me, will tune in to see the address from Her Majesty at 8:00 this evening. Thank you all very much indeed."
"1514","Matt Hancock: (26:55);(silence)"
"1515","Matt Hancock: (30:24);Good afternoon and welcome back to Downing Street for today’s Corona virus press conference. I’m joined today by our deputy Chief Medical Officer Dr. Jenny Harries. The government is working through out action plan which aims to save as many lives as possible by slowing the spread of the virus. Protecting the NHS and preventing it from being overwhelmed. Our response is built upon the bedrock of the best possible scientific and medical advice so that we can take the right steps at the right time."
"1516","Matt Hancock: (31:01);First by slowing the spread of the virus across our society. And second, by boosting the capacity of the NHS so that we can always care for those who’ve fall sick. Sadly Corona virus continues to spread. I can report that through the government’s ongoing monitoring and testing program according to the latest figures, 195,524 people have now been tested for the virus. And 47,806 have been tested positive. Across the UK the number of people admitted to hospital with Corona virus symptoms is now at 16,702. And of those who’ve contracted the virus, 4,934 have sadly died. We mourn their passing and we offer our profound sympathy."
"1517","Matt Hancock: (32:03);We mourn their passing, and we offer our profound sympathies to their families and friends. I’ve lost two people that I was fond of, so I understand what a difficult time this is for the country."
"1518","Matt Hancock: (32:15);This evening, Her Majesty the Queen will give a rare formal address to the nation. I know that we’ll all be watching and listening to see and hear what she has to say on behalf of us all. I understand that people are yearning to know how long this will all last, and the answer is entirely dependent on how much people follow the rules on social distancing. Following these rules is mission critical if we’re to protect the NHS, slow the spread, and give the NHS time to expand capacity, and so to save lives. The more people follow the rules, then the faster we will all be through it."
"1519","Matt Hancock: (33:04);So I say this to the small minority of people who are breaking the rules or pushing the boundaries. You’re risking your own life and the lives of others, and you’re making it harder for us all."
"1520","Matt Hancock: (33:18);We’ve included exercise as one of the things that you can leave your house to do, because exercise is good for our physical and our mental health, but please do not bend or break this rule. We can’t rule out further steps, but I don’t want anyone to think that any changes to the social distancing rules are imminent, because the vast majority are following the rules."
"1521","Matt Hancock: (33:45);To you, to all those at home, to all those who are following the rules, I want to say thank you on behalf of us all and especially on behalf of the doctors, nurses, and other colleagues who put their lives on the line to care for you in the NHS."
"1522","Matt Hancock: (34:02);As well as working to slow the spread, of course, we are increasing the capacity of the NHS. Last week, we saw the completion of the Nightingale Hospital in East London. It was planned and constructed and fully staffed within nine days. It was humbling to see the NHS, the military, and everyone involved in its construction pulling together in this time of need. There are many more Nightingales to come across our entire United Kingdom, including Harrogate, Birmingham, Manchester, Glasgow, Belfast, and Cardiff. These new hospitals are on top of the expansion in critical care across the NHS."
"1523","Matt Hancock: (34:38);There are currently over 2,336 spare critical care beds for the NHS in England and over 9,000 ventilators are now available to NHS coronavirus patients across the country thanks to the national effort to ramp up capacity. 300 new ventilators arrived this weekend from China, and we’ve seen UK manufacturers working at pace to develop new ones."
"1524","Matt Hancock: (35:05);Of course, hospitals and ventilators are critical, but our NHS is nothing without the people who work there. It’s been so encouraging to see over 27,000 former healthcare professionals signing up to return to the NHS frontline. I want to say a great big thank you to each and every one of you. Welcome back, and I hope that many more will sign up in the weeks ahead."
"1525","Matt Hancock: (35:33);This weekend, we also have launched our latest technology, a new coronavirus status checker. It asks people who currently have coronavirus symptoms to share their experiences to help us in our fight against the virus. It’ll help make use of this information, which will in turn help us to understand the disease, so we can, for instance, allocate resources like oxygen and ventilators and additional staff to where they’re needed most. Please do your bit if you currently have symptoms by going to www.nhs.uk/statuschecker. Because the more people who use it, then the better informed our response will be. The smart use of data like this and digital technologies is one of the strongest bulwarks that we have against coronavirus, because new technologies can help us to meet these new threats and allow us to gain the understanding and the insight that we need to defeat this virus once and for all."
"1526","Matt Hancock: (36:35);Technology is one piece of the jigsaw and an important piece, but ultimately, the strongest weapon in our arsenal is if we join together in tough times and follow the rules that have been put in place. I, like many of you, have young children at home. So I know what a challenge this can be for families. I really understand how much everyone wants to enjoy the sunny weather, but the cruel thing about coronavirus is that it thrives on social contact and the human bonds that brings so much to life."
"1527","Matt Hancock: (37:10);So we must show our resolve. All the things that we miss right now, going to the pub for a pint with friends or sitting in the park with a book or hugging a grandchild, we will have these moments again, and they’ll mean even more to us. But until then, the only way to protect yourselves, your loved ones, and your community is to stay at home, protect the NHS, and save lives."
"1528","Matt Hancock: (37:39);I’ll now handover to Jenny to take us through the daily statistics charts."
"1529","Jenny Harries: (37:43);Thank you,. Thank you."
"1530","Jenny Harries: (37:44);Could I have the first slide please? So what we have here, I think we’ve just got four slides to show what’s happening over the last few days. I think it’s really important that people can see the data and what is happening from our interventions. The first slide probably hasn’t changed very much, but that is really good news. What it shows is that our transport use is down and remains down since early March, beginning back in February as well. We’re managing to sustain that. As the Secretary of State has said, it is really important that we continue to do that despite the good weather. So thank you to the members of the public for observing that and please ensure that we keep moving in that direction. Next slide please."
"1531","Jenny Harries: (38:32);So the second slide shows the number of new cases. Now, these are lab test reported cases. You’ll be aware that our capacity is increasing all the time on laboratory tests. So we need to interpret this with a little bit of caution. We are following to a degree an epidemic curve. We can see the rise, and we will of course in due course be looking to see that level off. But you will notice that over the last 24 hours or so, there is an apparent big surge there. We just need to keep in mind that we need to watch this for a trend over time, because as our testing capacity increases, inevitably we will find more cases. Thank you. Next slide please."
"1532","Jenny Harries: (39:18);Again, England hospital admissions for COVID-19. I think the critical thing here is, again, looking at the data as it flows across. Think of the trend across the points on the graph, not on an individual day-to-day basis. But nevertheless, it gives an indication of how hard our different parts of the country are working. Here it’s hospital admissions, so it’s the NHS. But there will be comparative streams of health and care staff working in the care sector as well as the number of cases rise. So clearly London, we all know, has been working super-hard on the front line, and those cases continue to rise now with an increase over the last 24 hours in the northwest."
"1533","Jenny Harries: (40:05);We still, as the Secretary of State has said, have capacity in all of our hospitals to manage these cases, and we’re hoping in due course if everybody continues to practice social distancing, that those cases will start to fall. Clearly, there is a delay in the number of hospital admissions from when people often contract the disease and then become more ill and need more intensive care. So there will be a lag on some of this data compared with our social distancing measures. The last slide please."
"1534","Jenny Harries: (40:40);Again, this gives an indication of the global death comparison. Now again, as many of my colleagues have said before, this tries to give a direct comparison, even though some of the international comparative data is difficult to interpret. But I think it’s important that we continue to look and where necessary and where possible to learn from other countries. The UK in this slide is in blue in the center of that grouping. These are the deaths which have all been calculated from a zero day. They’ve been brought back to when the first 50 deaths were reported in the country."
"1535","Jenny Harries: (41:21);Now for the UK, these are COVID-associated deaths. They are all sad events. They will not all be a death as a result of COVID, but certainly we need to be sure that we are counting everything appropriately and being very clear and transparent on that. So we will continue to track and monitor this and learn from other countries where we can."
"1536","Matt Hancock: (41:45);Thanks very much. If we now go to questions. First question, Hugh Pym from the BBC."
"1537","Hugh Pym: (41:51);Thank you very much. Secretary of State, you’ve said there are just over 9,000 ventilators in the system, and in due course, 18, 000 should be in place. How many will there be there next week at a time when experts say the NHS will be close to or at the peak of demand?"
"1538","Matt Hancock: (42:11);Thanks, Hugh. As I said, we have over 9,000 ventilators now across the NHS, and we are ramping that up. The production from the domestic manufacturer is starting to come on stream, and the key goal is to always keep the amount of critical care beds, which nearly all need ventilators, above the demand. I haven’t got an exact figure for how many extra we will deliver next week, not least because when we bring them in from abroad, there are risks to the timing there and challenges to the timing. But I would expect many more over the next week. The goal continues to be to keep ramping it up to the 18,000 target that we’ve set. We don’t expect on the central expectation to need 18,000, but I want to keep the ramp up going, because I always want to keep the supply ahead of the need. So I’m sorry I don’t have any more detail than that which we’ve put out today, but that is because of the inherently uncertain dates of arrival of kit, especially from our international sources."
"1539","Matt Hancock: (43:34);Shehab Khan from ITV."
"1540","Shehab Khan: (43:37);Health Secretary, there will be plenty of people, some of whom have no access to open spaces who do not understand why they cannot briefly sit in a park if they listen to the government’s guidance and stay two meters away from the nearest person. Can you explain exactly why you shouldn’t be doing that? Also, if I may, you just said you are not ruling out further measures if people ignore the social distancing measures. Can you clarify with practical examples what exactly you are considering and in what circumstances they’ll be used?"
"1541","Matt Hancock: (44:09);No, we’re not planning any changes to the rules imminently, so we’re not looking at any specifics in that space. But what we are doing is being absolutely clear that the current rules must be followed. Of course, I understand why people ask the question of why have the rules been set as they have. The reason is that exercise helps your physical health, your mental health, is incredibly important. That’s why we’ve kept it in the rules and the reason that sitting and not exercising doesn’t give you the advantage that exercise does. I don’t know whether from a medical point of view, Jenny, you want to say anything more in addition to that?"
"1542","Jenny Harries: (44:57);Really just to add to that, I think we have always said right from the start of managing this incident that it’s really important that we balance physical and mental health needs as the Secretary of State has described. But I think one of the issues, and we’ve taken that into account through scientific advice, is around behaviors as well. It’s not just the what are you doing, it’s the how that you do it. So if you’re sitting on a park bench, people tend to accumulate. It’s very difficult to prevent that. I think actually having rules where we are getting all of the benefits and minimizing the risks of the harms is an important approach to maintain."
"1543","Matt Hancock: (45:39);Thanks very much. Does that answer your question? Would you like a …"
"1544","Shehab Khan: (45:44);Yeah. You mentioned that you were considering tightening up the measures. What exactly does that mean? So if people continued to ignore your social distancing rule, what does tightening up the measures actually in practical terms mean?"
"1545","Matt Hancock: (45:58);Well, we’re not planning any changes to those rules imminently, but we do absolutely require people to follow them. We have had these questions about the boundaries of the rules and people pushing the boundaries. But as Jenny just set out, there’s very clear reasons that we set the rules as they are, and we want people to follow those rules. Of course, there’s now the police in force against them. They’re not rules that anybody would want to have in place, but they’re rules that need to be in place, and everybody must follow them and stay at home wherever possible unless for those four reasons. We’re crystal clear about that. We’ve set those rules, we’re enforcing against those rules, and we reiterate those rules, because that is best way to be able to bend the curve down and stop the spread of the virus."
"1546","Matt Hancock: (46:57);Alex Thomson from Channel four."
"1547","Alex Thomson: (47:00);Good afternoon to you both. You’ll both be aware that in the last few hours, an urgent directive has gone out to NHS ICU doctors to the effect that if hospitals are using a lot of oxygen machines, the entire oxygen supply to the hospital can fail, from C-PAP face mask ventilators right through to operating theaters. So what has been done to address that critical problem? More widely, we understand three hospitals in the past few days have come close indeed to running out of oxygen. What’s being done to increase supplies to ensure that doesn’t happen in the coming days and weeks, when clearly the number of patients will increase?"
"1548","Matt Hancock: (47:40);Yes, this is a very important operational question. We have adequate supplies of the oxygen that’s needed in hospitals. We need to, of course, make sure that each hospital has that available. We have had an equipment failure, as I think you referenced. We therefore had to divert some ambulances, but this is the normal-"
"1549","Matt Hancock: (48:03);He therefore had to divert some ambulances, but this is the normal operation of the NHS when there are things like equipment failures. Of course, interest in it is heightened because of the nature of coronavirus, but the supply, the quantity of oxygen and supply of oxygen is something that we’ve been working very hard on and we have a very high degree of confidence in the supply of oxygen. Is there anything else?"
"1550","Jenny Harries: (48:26);I was just going to add actually some comments that I think Professor Steve Parris made a few days ago, which is actually to signal that this is a positive sign in most cases. If you have a whole system where, it’s unusual in the UK where we have a National Health Service, it means that we have a system of flagging where there are potential risks or problems before they actually become a significant problem. It is a strength of our system that we have these flags going off at regular intervals, and I think his comment back to the questions at the time was this is a positive thing. We flag them, we deal with them as they arise, and but to reinforce what the secretary state has said, is there is no insufficiency of oxygen and I think the public should not be concerned that if they become ill and need a hospital admission, that care is available to them."
"1551","Matt Hancock: (49:17);Okay, great. Charlotte Ives from talk radio."
"1552","Charlotte I.: (49:21);Thank you Mr. Hancock. You changed and updated the rules on PPE a few days ago. And I was speaking to a doctor who said before these changes he was moving between treating COVID patients and cancer patients who had compromised immune systems and he was terrified that he would be deadly to them because he didn’t feel it was adequate. So can I ask you firstly, was he correct to be scared and if he wasn’t correct to be scared, why has something had to change?"
"1553","Matt Hancock: (49:51);Well, we’ve changed the upgraded the guidance. So now in all instances it’s at or above the levels of protective equipment recommended by the World Health Organization. But we’ve also upgraded it following more, being known about the virus. As we’ve learned about the science of coronavirus over the last few months. So we will keep upgrading and improving guidance as we learn more about it. So that was the main reason for the changes to make sure that we reflected the latest that we know about the virus. And I think that the new guidance set out on Thursday has been very widely welcomed and provides clarity about what protective equipment is needed, in which circumstance. And then of course we have to deliver and make sure that protective equipment that is needed according to the guidance gets to the frontline. Jenny."
"1554","Jenny Harries: (50:54);Yeah. So I think just to support that, I don’t know the individual case that you are describing, but clearly it wouldn’t matter whether you were a cancer patient or a patient in another setting. We want to maintain good infection prevention and control procedures. And the bedrock of that in the UK and throughout the NHS is actually systematic practice. It’s one reason why this country is very good. We don’t get a lot of nosocomial infection as an onward spread in healthcare settings because it is the basics, which we are also obviously been teaching the public around a good hand and respiratory hygiene in a systematic approach and using PP carefully, which keeps that at bay. But I think the new guidance there, what it has done is it’s reinforced the fact that our guidance previously was actually inconsistent with WHO guidance, it was endorsed, it was a, I think back on the 27th by WHO and recognized."
"1555","Jenny Harries: (51:51);But what we’re seeing now is a slightly different prevalence of disease and we’ve adapted our guidance to manage that. So there’s a level of uncertainty and there’s a level of protection which is higher in some high risk procedures. So the areas we’re very concerned about from a clinical perspective are what we call aerosol generating procedures under pressure. So this is where somebody, where you get a potential airborne spread and we want to make sure people have absolutely adequate protection there. And then the other issue is recognizing the settings in which people are working. So the most obvious one would be if we went back say four months, very unlikely anybody in the emergency department would see anybody with COVID-19. Actually now, in some of those settings where it’s uncertain for professionals when they’re first seeing patients and understanding them, it’s important that they have covered in anticipation of what might be a different prevalence of disease. So that’s basically, I can give you more detail of the actual equipment, but that’s as effectively what we’re trying to do is covering the changing circumstances."
"1556","Matt Hancock: (53:02);Did you have a follow up? You put your hand up?"
"1557","Charlotte I.: (53:06);Yes. I was just going to ask, you talked about us now knowing more about the disease. So knowing what we know now, should we have had these higher levels of protection from the beginning were people at risk?"
"1558","Matt Hancock: (53:16);Well the thing is that you can only make decisions based on the information that you have at the time. And we’re constantly looking for new information about this disease so that we can improve the guidance that we have and the response that we have to it. So, the question that we have in government and that I ask myself every day is, are we doing the right thing now? And what can we change to improve our response for the future? And so you can have a debate about the past, but you have to take decisions on the information that’s available at the time. And I think the previous guidance was the best guidance possible on the information that was available at the time and then we’ve upgraded it."
"1559","Jenny Harries: (54:03);So I think to support that, it’s not so much, we are obviously learning all the time about the disease, but the basic guidance was entirely appropriate. And as I say, endorsed by WHO, despite I think some media reporting about differences. But the important thing is we are now operating in a slightly different environment. So it’s the uncertainty that some clinicians, not all clinicians find themselves in that we have reviewed where that is to ensure that they feel safer in those environments."
"1560","Jenny Harries: (54:33);I think there are other opportunities we’re learning from. So for example, where we are finding that you can reuse masks safely, for example, with appropriate cleaning and technology. That’s very helpful because of course we need to keep in mind that regardless of supplies and advice, the whole world wants personal protective equipment and it’s really important that we all use it appropriately and judiciously. Exactly have it in the right places where it’s needed but not be wasting it so that the people who are working on the front line, whether it be in care homes, domiciliary care, or in the front line of an emergency department, they have the right PPE at the right time for the right clinical risk and that’s what our whole basis of the guidance is based upon."
"1561","Matt Hancock: (55:21);Thanks very much. Jane Merrick at the i."
"1562","Jane M: (55:26);Thank you. How do you square what the Queen says today about the nation’s attributes of self discipline with your warning about having to toughen the restrictions of people, don’t stop gathering at parks? That’s to the health secretary and to the deputy chief medical officer. What is the testing strategy for care homes and prisons? Given that these are emerging as a major hotspots for cases and sadly deaths, are prisons and care homes going to be next in line for mass testing after NHS workers?"
"1563","Matt Hancock: (55:56);Well, I think we’re all looking forward to seeing what the Queen has to say and watching her address and listening very carefully to it. I think the message from all of those of us in across the board is very clear, which is that we need perseverance in the face of some great challenges and that also means the perseverance in following the rules. And I couldn’t be clearer about my emphatic requirement of people, which is backed up by law to follow the rules that we’ve set out and to make sure that the people stay at home. That is the number one thing that you can do. And we’ve set out those four exemptions and people should stay at home unless they are going out for one of those four reasons and those four reasons alone. Jenny."
"1564","Jenny Harries: (56:50);Thank you. So, absolutely you’ve highlighted two very critical and domains if you like, for public health surveillance and intervention. That’s been recognized right from the start of this incident and in fact is recognized before COVID-19 we always keep a close eye on care homes in prisons because the setting in which people live is potentially problematic. So the care homes, clearly you tend to have a collection in the nicest possible use of the word of potentially elderly or more vulnerable individuals. That’s one issue. And then certainly in prisons you are intentionally through a prison operation holding people together. So both of those environments are very well recognized. In fact, Public Health England hosts the WHO collaborating center for healthy prisons. So we have a lot of experience and actually advise other parts of the world. And I know that the key consultants there have been working with Ministry of Justice and with the Prime Minister on establishing and looking at what have those environments should be treated. You are specifically about testing and testing in both prisons and care homes has always been on the priority list, so once we moved from containment to delay, if you remember the categories of testing that we have our clinical care of patients in hospitals as an absolute category because that’s how we manage the safety and the benefit of that health intervention. But what we then do is test in care homes and prisons. What we do do though is we wouldn’t necessarily test everybody because you want to test whether it’s going to be a positive advantage to doing the testing. I’ll stop in a moment, and we’ll usually test up to about five people to establish vary depending on the setting, but to be sure that we have established what the issue is. It’s usually quite possible in a setting like that to understand then on a clinical basis, whether there is a case, it may not be laboratory confirmed, but it would be a presumed clinical case."
"1565","Matt Hancock: (59:03);Thanks very much Jim at the FT."
"1566","Jane M: (59:05);Sorry."
"1567","Matt Hancock: (59:06);Oh sorry. You wanted to come back Jane, sorry."
"1568","Jane M: (59:08);Want to come back on the question on testing that you said that they are next in line, but when will that testing take place? Given that there are probably lots of people who are very concerned about their relatives in care homes and also the people who work in care homes and people who work in prisons."
"1569","Jenny Harries: (59:23);So sorry, perhaps didn’t explain myself clearly enough. So for any care home outbreaks, whether it relates to a worker or an individual resident or a prisoner or somebody supporting him or her, those tests happen now they are in the prioritized list already. So the groups of people who are routinely tested and have been ever since we have started responding to this incident include potential outbreaks in care homes and prisons. That’s been going on right from the start. In terms of other workers there as we go forward for NHS workers and front line care workers and responders, clearly those are in the priority group because we recognize that those workers, we need to think of the care sector almost like the other arm. We talk a lot about the acute hospital sector, but we often forget that it’s the care sector who are operating in the community, community nurses and domiciliary care workers who are equally important in our drive to to manage this incident so they will come within prioritize key workers."
"1570","Matt Hancock: (01:00:30);Does that answer the question, Jane?"
"1571","Jane M: (01:00:34);I think it was just to get clarity on when that testing would take place for those workers. There’s no specific timing."
"1572","Jenny Harries: (01:00:41);The outbreaks happen already and the other workers will be falling into the expanding program, which has been ramping up as you’ve heard and I think has been reported on a daily basis this week."
"1573","Matt Hancock: (01:00:53);Thanks. Jim from the FT."
"1574","Jim: (01:00:57);Secretary of State, could you please tell us yes or no, whether the government is preparing to take equity stakes of taxpayer’s behalf and some of the large companies which had found themselves in major crisis because of the pandemic and if so choosing that Richard Branson’s Virgin Atlantic is a worthy recipient of that kind of assistance given that in 2017 Virgin Care sued your beloved NHS after losing a contract. And given that, so Richard lives as a tax exile on Necker Island. And the question for Jenny Harries, I know you might say it’s too early to speculate about how the lockdown might end, but Neil Ferguson seemed to suggest this morning that there could be a kind of staggered way of doing it in terms of different age groups and different regions coming out of the lockdown before others. Is that possible?"
"1575","Matt Hancock: (01:01:46);Well, I’m going to not answer the first question and then Jenny can answer the second one. My response to the first question is, this is an area in which Rishi Sunak has been doing unbelievable work. He’s recognized around the world for the first class response, economic response that we’ve got here in the UK, and overall from the protection of workers, the protection of self employed right across the board. They’ve taken the right steps and I think done it with remark."
"1576","Dominic Raab: (00:00);… beat the coronavirus and see this nation through the challenge ahead. In the last week, under the Prime Minister’s leadership, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, Michael Gove, has explained what we’re doing to boost manufacturing capability here at home to meet the rising demand for ventilators and other equipment in the NHS."
"1577","Dominic Raab: (00:21);Business Secretary Alok Sharma has been setting out what the government is doing to support small businesses. And yesterday, Health Secretary Matt Hancock gave an update on what we’re doing to bolster capacity in the NHS, including increasing the number of critical care beds."
"1578","Dominic Raab: (00:38);The FCO is supporting all of these operational priorities, so we’re deployed the diplomatic network right around the world to source and buy ventilators and protective equipment so that we can reinforce the NHS frontline here at home."
"1579","Dominic Raab: (00:54);At the same time, we’re working with other governments and the airlines to bring home as many stranded British nationals as we possibly can, prioritizing our most vulnerable citizens. On commercial flights, we’ve helped over 200,000 UK nationals come home from Spain, 13,000 from Egypt, 8,000 from Indonesia. We’ve also chartered flights from seven different countries bringing home more than 2,000 British nationals. We’ve repatriated a further 1,550 from cruise ships, including most recently the Coral Princess and the Zandaam."
"1580","Dominic Raab: (01:33);And for those travelers who are still stuck abroad, we’re doing everything we can to keep international airports open, to keep commercial flights running, and to charter flights when there are no other options under the new arrangements that I announced last week, and which have now been agreed with 14 airlines. We’ve allocated 75 million pounds to support those arrangements."
"1581","Dominic Raab: (01:58);We’ve already had flights back from countries including Peru, Ghana, and Tunisia. And we’re fixing further flights from India, South Africa, Nepal, and the Philippines, which will fly later on this week. So I want to reassure people every arm of government is doing everything it possibly can to defeat the coronavirus and rise to the challenges that it presents us at home and abroad."
"1582","Dominic Raab: (02:23);Last night, Her Majesty, the Queen reflected on the national spirit of unity and resolve that we’re seeing in our country, as well as the collective effort we need to tackle the disease. From our heroic doctors, nurses and care workers, through to those manning the tills at supermarkets and pharmacies, those driving the lorries and the buses, they’re all worthy of our applause, they’re all worthy of our admiration."
"1583","Dominic Raab: (02:49);And on that note, both the Prime Minister and I would like to thank all of the NHS staff for their truly heroic work, and we urge the public to continue to follow the government’s advice to stay at home, protect the NHS, and save lives. And on that note, I’m going to pass it over to Angela for an update on the latest data."
"1584","Angela McLean: (03:08);Thank you. If I could start with a first slide, this is about the work that we have all been doing in order to stay at home. So what you see that is how much change there’s been in how we use transport. And the orange line, I think is the one that shows us across the whole country how national rail usage has fallen right down to below 20% of what it was during February. And you can see with other ways of moving around, they’re also much, much lower than you would normally expect at this time of year. You can see that on the 23rd of March, so two weeks ago today, it really, really fell very dramatically."
"1585","Angela McLean: (03:51);The efforts all of us are making to stay at home and save lives are working. There are, if I could have the next slide, the growth in the number of cases in our hospitals is not as bad as it would have been if we had not made these efforts. So it is working, but the big question is, is the virus spread slowing down enough to make hospital admissions stabilize and then even full?"
"1586","Angela McLean: (04:21);If I could have the next slide, please. So these are people being admitted to hospital with COVID-19 across different regions of Great Britain. And what you can see is that having risen very steadily up until around about the 1st of April, they’re now starting to [inaudible 00:04:42] more complicated behavior and starting, we hope, to slow down. But it really is too soon to see the effects of the big changes we all made to our lives from the 23rd March onwards, because remember, that’s only two weeks ago, and it takes several weeks after you’ve become infected for you to realize that you’re ill enough that you really need to be in hospital. So we’re all watching these numbers very, very carefully and we’re very much hoping that what’s going to happen next is they will at least stop rising."
"1587","Angela McLean: (05:19);Next slide, please. The final set of numbers to look at today is the global comparisons of this very sad deaths from COVID. And this is the most late data. So these are data that show the date of reporting of deaths, and that can take a very long time after someone’s died, and can be rather variable how long that takes in different countries."
"1588","Angela McLean: (05:45);And we will expect even if the number of people being admitted to hospitals and ITU units does start to stabilize, certainly we do expect this number to keep on rising because of course it takes time after people have been admitted to hospital for them either to get better, or very sadly, to die. And then of course it further takes time for those deaths to be reported. So I’ll stop there and hand back to Dominic."
"1589","Dominic Raab: (06:11);Angela, thank you very much. So I’m very happy to take questions. Laura Kuenssberg from the BBC."
"1590","Laura Kuenssberg: (06:17);Thanks very much, Foreign Secretary. Firstly, on the Prime Minister, if the Prime Minister is ill enough to need to be in hospital, how can he be well enough to run the country at a time of national emergency? Wouldn’t it be better if he step back, even briefly, in order to recover properly? And if I could ask the medics, you say that the restrictions are working but too early to tell the longterm effects, but what would your view on what are likely exit strategy from the restrictions be?"
"1591","Dominic Raab: (06:48);Thanks, Laura. Well, first of all, on the PM, he was admitted to hospital for tests as a precaution only. And that was because some of the symptoms that he had when he first tested positive had persisted. He’s had a comfortable night in St. Thomas’, he’s in good spirits and he’s being readily updated. And he still remains in charge of the government, and we’re getting on with all of the various strands of work to make sure at home and abroad we can defeat the virus and pull the country through coronavirus and the challenges that undoubtedly we’re facing at the moment. Angela, do you want to comment on the [crosstalk 00:07:21]?"
"1592","Angela McLean: (07:19);Yes. Our advice has been very straightforward, that we need a good, long time series of data on all of these stages of infection in order to be able to tell what the impact or the measures that came in on the 23rd of March are going to be. It’s too early to tell yet. We need to carry on following those instructions so that we can work out three weeks later what actually happens in hospitals."
"1593","Dominic Raab: (07:50);Does that give you the answers you need or do you want to come back?"
"1594","Laura Kuenssberg: (07:54);I’m just wondering, there is increasing discussion about what the exit strategy from these restrictions should be. I would be interested to hear Angela or professor, what’s his view on what they might anticipate given all the-"
"1595","Laura: (08:03);… uncertainties around?"
"1596","Angela McLean: (08:05);Again, our suggestion has been completely clear. We need to know how well the current restrictions are working before we can say anything sensible about what the next stage might be."
"1597","Dominic Raab: (08:19);The number one priority, Laura, right now is to stop the spread and to make sure that we can get past the peak, and I think that’s the overriding focus of the government right now. And the other decisions can be considered in light of the evidence that we’re taking from Angela and Chris in due course."
"1598","Dominic Raab: (08:38);Beth Rigby from Skye."
"1599","Beth Rigby: (08:41);Thank you. Foreign Secretary, one of your team, African Minister James Dotteridge, today urged the Prime Minister to rest up and let others do the heavy lifting until he gets better. Do you not agree that the Prime Minister at this moment needs to rest, not work? And a question to Professor Witty first, welcome back, it’s nice to see you back. We’re entering the third week of lockdown. The government said it would review the lockdown at the end of this week. Given we’re now approaching the peak of the epidemic, will you be advising the ministers to keep these measures in place? And can you give the British people a sense of whether this will continue for weeks or months? Thank you."
"1600","Dominic Raab: (09:27);Well on your question about the PM, look he’s in charge but you’re right, he’ll continue to take doctor’s advice on what to do next. And we have a team which in the way I describe is full throttle, making sure that his directions and his instructions are being implemented and followed through, whether it’s the purchase of ventilators through to the diplomatic effort to return UK nationals who are stranded abroad. But as ever, the Prime Minister will take the medical advice that he gets from his doctor. Chris?"
"1601","Chris Witty: (09:58);Just to add, and I’m basically going to say exactly the same thing that Angela said earlier, which is the key thing is to get to the point where we are confident we’ve reached the peak, and this is now beyond the peak, and at that point I think it is possible to have a serious discussion about all the things we need to do, step by step to move to the next phase of managing this. But I think to start having that discussion until we’re confident, that’s what we’ve got to, would I think be a mistake."
"1602","Dominic Raab: (10:26);Robert Peston, ITV. Oh sorry Beth, did you want to come back?"
"1603","Beth Rigby: (10:29);Yeah. Just to follow up Professor Witty though, just to be clear, given that we are approaching the peak and it’s the end of the week whereby the government will review whether to relax restrictions, it seems to me you are saying that the lockdown measures will continue beyond this end of this week?"
"1604","Chris Witty: (10:45);Well, I think to be clear, we do not think we know for certain that the peak will be at the end of this week. This was the point that Angela was making earlier, and I think until we’re confident we’re there, that will be too early to start calling the point where we can move to the next phase of this epidemic."
"1605","Dominic Raab: (11:03);The government’s number one priority, its overriding priority is to get past the peak, and we do that by stopping the spread, which is why those decisions and those considerations, Beth, you right referred to, will have to wait until we’re beyond that point. Robert Peston, ITV."
"1606","Robert Peston: (11:21);Couple of questions, probably for the two scientific experts. First for Professor Witty, I think none of us could really know quite how much burden it is even [inaudible 00:11:38] in the peak of health to be prime minister. The normal advice when somebody’s been as ill as the current prime minister is to rest in order to get better. He’s not superhuman. Some would argue that he is taking too much of a risk to the extent to which he’s still working. So as a doctor, Professor Witty, I want you to wonder if you could comment a bit on that."
"1607","Robert Peston: (12:02);Secondly, I completely understand why you are saying we cannot outline a plan for lifting the restrictions until we know whether the current measures are working. But equally the damage from a prolonged economic lockdown will be tremendous in the sense that as an economy, we simply won’t be able to generate revenues, pay taxes to public services and the rest. So I do think the British people would want to feel that the government is working on a workable strategy, and in particular, is it possible to exit the lockdown unless and until we have a program of mass testing for the virus, and unless and until we have technological solutions of tracing people who may have come into contact with those who have the virus?"
"1608","Dominic Raab: (12:54);Well, I’ll let Chris comment on the technical aspects, but first of all, just be clear, the prime minister, both in terms of going into Saint Thomas’ yesterday was taking the advice of doctors. So, he’s followed the doctor’s advice there and in terms of his recovering in the days ahead, will continue to do so. And just again on the exit strategy, let’s be clear about this… I’ll let Chris talk to the technical points, but the risk right now is if we take our focus off the strategy, which is beginning to work, is that we won’t get through the peak as fast as we need to, which is why it’s perfectly legitimate to ask the question, but the government’s overriding priority has got to be to keep up the work that and the commitment that so many people have made, to make sure that we maintain the social distancing, we stop the spread, we protect the NHS as we come through the peak. Chris."
"1609","Chris Witty: (13:46);So my advice to the prime minister was to take the medical advice of the excellent NHS doctors who are advising him, and I’m sure he’ll continue to do that. The only bit of advice I gave him in addition to that was as is widely reported, I did advise him to get tested in the first place because I thought that was prudent. But after that, I didn’t wish to muddle my role with him. I’m not his medical practitioner. I’m his advisor on wider issues."
"1610","Chris Witty: (14:09);In terms of the points you make about there must be planning for next phase. Of course there is, and it’s quite complicated. There are a very large number of technical elements which need to be brought together. Testing is one of them, but it also involves, for example, considering the likelihood of a variety of different other technologies including vaccines, including drugs and when they’re likely to be available. I think the one thing I would say at this point is we’ve got to remember just from the health point of view and clearly there are wider social and economic issues as well, but there are at least four different kinds of mortality and ill health we need to take into account over the period of this epidemic. There’s the direct effects of people dying from Coronavirus. There’s the indirect effects of the NHS if it were to become overwhelmed and therefore unable to provide emergency care for either Coronavirus or other areas."
"1611","Chris Witty: (15:10);And all the activities we’re doing at the moment are to make sure that both of those are minimized. But it is really important also to remember that there will be effects from the fact that some healthcare has had to be postponed to make room for this within the NHS. And of course anything that has an impact on the socioeconomic status, particularly of people who are more deprived, will have a longterm health impact as well. And we have to, in our exit strategy, balance all of these different elements, which to some extent can be intention. So, I think it’s just important to understand, this is going to be quite a complicated set of trying to work out how different things fit together as we move to the next phase of this epidemic."
"1612","Dominic Raab: (15:51);Does that address your questions Rob?"
"1613","Robert Peston: (15:54);Except, I’m just being thick I suppose, but I don’t really understand why talking about, even if it’s in the long term, the way we’re going to exit, it somehow distracts-"
"1614","Professor Whitty: (16:03);… from the imperative of social distancing. I think everyone accepts that social distancing is absolutely vital. But why do people hope that there is a plan to exit? Why would this act reduce the urgency for people who are doing what they’re doing now?"
"1615","Dominic Raab: (16:18);Well, the two reassurances I can give you that that works so that we can properly assess the measures that we introduced is in place, but also that we do not want to confuse the message right now because we are not past the peak. To get past the peak, we must have people respecting those guidelines, otherwise we undo all the good work that so many people have achieved and contributed to through their forbearance, particularly as the weather gets a bit warmer."
"1616","Angela McLean: (16:44);We can only make calculations about what we might do next if we have some reasonable data on how large the impact of what we’ve done is so far and we can really only start to collect that from now because we’re now about two weeks after people would have gotten infected on the 23rd of March or later."
"1617","Dominic Raab: (17:06);Thanks, Angela. Victoria McDonald, Channel Four"
"1618","Victoria McDonald: (17:09);Thank you very much. I was wondering how does the number of patients in ITU beds in London right now compare with what you’d been planning at this stage? Is there any suggestion that maybe you won’t need as many beds at the ExCel Centre at the Nightingale as you had expected?"
"1619","Dominic Raab: (17:30);I don’t know whether Angela or Chris, you want to …"
"1620","Speaker 1: (17:34);[crosstalk 00:17:33]."
"1621","Chris Witty: (17:34);I mean there’s a very long answer and a very short answer. The very short answer is our principle aim in both the fantastic response from the general public in terms of social distancing and all the things people have done and not done on that and also off the NHS stuff we built things up is to ensure that the gap between the number of beds available for intensive care and those that are needed is always in a situation where we have some room to spare. If we end up in a situation where we have more ICU beds at all times during this epidemic than we absolutely need to deal both with COVID and other areas, that will be a success. That is something which is critical for our overall aim. So that’s in a sense is what we would like to see is some head room between what we need and what we’ve got available at any given time. Both for COVID and for other conditions."
"1622","Dominic Raab: (18:30);Of course, that’s got to take into account the regional distribution of the need, which is why as well as HMS Nightingale in London, we’ve got the other plans to build in Birmingham, Manchester, Bristol and Harrow Gate. Did you want to come back?"
"1623","Victoria McDonald: (18:46);Well, I just wondered where we are at the moment. If you look at the modeling and you refer back to some of the slides you’ve just shown, is it the case that ITU is performing better now than you had actually expected at this point?"
"1624","Dominic Raab: (19:00);Well, we’re not remotely complacent and we’re doing everything we can to make sure we’ve not only got the capacity but a bit of room for maneuver as Chris has mentioned."
"1625","Dominic Raab: (19:11);Tom Newton Dunn from The Sun."
"1626","Tom Newton Dunn: (19:16);Foreign secretary, thank you very much. Back on to the prime minister’s condition, if you don’t mind. Two factual questions for you, foreign secretary. Have you spoken to Boris Johnson today either by text or telephone and have you taken over any of his security responsibilities or is he also on that from his hospital bed?"
"1627","Tom Newton Dunn: (19:34);To CMO, if I may, can you explain why you recommended he go into the hospital for testing and can you possibly have a go at answering the question the foreign secretary didn’t answer, explaining the contradiction why the prime minister is sick enough to take up a valuable hospital bed, but well enough to still be running the country?"
"1628","Dominic Raab: (19:52);Well, Tom, I’m not going to comment on security matters, but I spoke to the PM over the weekend. I chaired the morning meeting that he would normally chair. He’s being kept abreast of all the relevant developments. Of course, in terms of the balance that you described, and I’ll of course let Chris comment, that’s something that he will decide based on the medical advice he’s received from his doctor. Chris, do you want to add-"
"1629","Chris Witty: (20:16);Yeah, I want to be clear. It was not me who recommend that he went into hospital, that’s entirely between him and his excellent NHS team. The only thing I recommended was that he got tested in the first point, place. I completely agree that this is a question for discussion between him and his medical advisors who are outstanding."
"1630","Dominic Raab: (20:33);Tom, do you want a come back?"
"1631","Tom Newton Dunn: (20:36);Yeah, please. I mean, clearly the country is in some doubt over exactly how well the prime minister is. Mr. [Whitty 00:00:20:42], can you possibly explain, is he in risk of catching pneumonia? Does he have pneumonia? Or is there no chance of that at all?"
"1632","Professor Whitty: (20:50);I’m absolutely not going to discuss any individual patient nor, to be clear, do I actually have all the details, nor should I because this is an issue between him and his medical advisors. I can give a general answer which is the majority, the clear majority of people who do end up going to hospital, they end up going into a general bed. They may or may not need oxygen and other things and they don’t need to go further than that. But that is absolutely not a comment on his personal situation, which would be completely inappropriate for me to comment on. It’s just a general comment on how things tend to progress in hospital."
"1633","Dominic Raab: (21:25);Chris Smyth from The Times."
"1634","Chris Smyth: (21:26);Thank you. First can I ask Professor Whitty, the government today has conceded that no antibody tests that it or anyone else has developed is yet good enough for their purposes and scientists talk about working with companies to improve the products on offer because it isn’t nearly yet. Can I ask you about timing? At exactly what stage of the epidemic do you want to be using a mass home antibody test? At what level of population, level of infection would this be needed? Does there come a point where if no improvement can be made, the tests we have now will have to be good enough?"
"1635","Chris Smyth: (21:59);Can I also ask, foreign secretary, you chaired the coronavirus meeting this morning, you’re here this afternoon, if the country and the prime minister needs it, do you feel ready to take charge of government?"
"1636","Dominic Raab: (22:12);Chris, you want to go first?"
"1637","Chris Witty: (22:14);Okay. On the antibody tests, so the antibody tests are at there most useful at a later stage of the epidemic. At this point in time, we would expect quite a small proportion of the population has probably got antibodies. There’s two reasons for that. There’s the proportion actually infected and then there’s a period of time between someone getting an infection and antibodies being routinely available, routinely detectable. It depends which kind of antibody you’re talking about, how soon that is. But most of the tests for, most of the labs who’ve looked at this would say 21, 28 days would be the kind of timescale you’d be talking about. They do tend to be more effective later in the epidemic."
"1638","Chris Witty: (23:02);In terms of the current tests we’ve got at the moment, you’ve got to remember this is a new disease to which we have had absolutely no knowledge at the beginning of January, and inevitably we’re feeling our way to some extent. I am very confident we will develop antibody tests, whether they be lab-based or a dipstick-based over the next period, I’m very confident of that."
"1639","Chris Witty: (23:25);But the fact that we have not in our first pass in the first things that people were produced got ones which are highly effective is not particularly surprising to anybody who understands how tests are developed. I would expect those to continue to improve both on, potentially on the dipstick side and definitely on the lab side, which would be available in due course through the NHS over time. The more accurate they are, the more useful they need to be for us. They will become more accurate as time goes by. I think the situation we’ll find ourselves in in a few months and possibly a few weeks will be considerably different to what we find ourselves in at the moment. But I think it made a lot of –"
"1640","Chris Witty: (24:03);… sense to get started early on this, because this is clearly something which, in the long run is going to be very important for how we manage this epidemic."
"1641","Dominic Raab: (24:11);And look, on the question to me, the prime minister is in charge, he’s leading the government, and giving directions as and when required. And of course, as you mentioned, I chaired the 9:15 morning meeting, the whole team is focused on delivering those instructions, so I’m not going to get into any hypotheticals. Did you want to come back on either of those points?"
"1642","Chris Smyth: (24:31);[crosstalk 00:24:30]. Professor [Witty 00:00:32], you talked about the lab based tests. Does that suggest that we may have to give up on an idea of a home based, instant reading test, and just go back to a system where you have to send results back to a lab?"
"1643","Chris Witty: (24:43);No, it doesn’t. It just means that, inevitably the reason that the UK went for quite a lot of tests of different types to begin with is to try a variety of different ones and see which ones work. We expect the technology to improve over time, so I certainly do not think we will be giving up on this at this point. But inevitably, it’s going to take a while before we get to the optimal test performance. That is, it would be very surprising if first out of the gate, we’ve got to the best outcome that we could for these kinds of tests."
"1644","Chris Smyth: (25:13);Anna from the telegraph."
"1645","Anna: (25:18);Dominic Raab, could you first just clarify your answer to [inaudible 00:25:20] earlier? And are you saying that you have not spoken to the prime minister today? And secondly, which you can see, that there is an importance to giving businesses an idea of when, of what kind of exit strategy the government has, and a rough idea of how long it would take, and whether it would be say, standard by region or by type of person? And are these kind of things under consideration? And just a question for Chris Witty, in your medical opinion, should individuals who’ve been hospitalized with coronavirus continue to work from their hospital beds?"
"1646","Dominic Raab: (25:57);Thanks. So, I spoke to the PM on Saturday, was the last time I spoke to him in person. And in relation to your other questions, so, obviously we’re very mindful of the challenges businesses are facing, small businesses, all employers, and of course the workforce as well. But the risk is, if we start taking our eye off the ball of tackling the greater virus, stopping the spread, and getting through the peak, we risk delaying the point at which we could, in the future, take those decisions on easing restrictions. So, it is really important right now to keep the overriding focus on maintaining the discipline that we’ve had, keeping adherence to the guidelines that the government has set out, and making sure that we stop the spread of coronavirus."
"1647","Chris Witty: (26:45);And making a general point as a doctor, patients of mine, and to be clear, that is definitely not the prime minister, but patients of mine, there are some who are in a hospital bed but are perfectly capable of managing massively complicated things from the hospital bed, others clearly are not. That is absolutely a conversation between the individual and the doctors and nurses who are looking after them."
"1648","Dominic Raab: (27:07);Did you want to come back on either of those points?"
"1649","Anna: (27:12);Yeah, I mean, on the exit strategy, we know that different departments are already starting to look at what kind of things can be done in their fields, and I’m [inaudible 00:27:21] number 10 on that. Wouldn’t it help business confidence to give some sort of idea of what’s on the table?"
"1650","Dominic Raab: (27:29);Well, I think the risk is, and it would undermine business confidence if we took our foot off the pedal and eased up on the restrictions right now. And as a result of that, we found that we weren’t stopping the spread of the disease as quickly as we otherwise could. And I think a lot of business community will understand that. Of course, all of the review and the measures to make sure that we can review the effectiveness of the measures in the way that Angela has described, all of that work is going on."
"1651","Dominic Raab: (28:02);[Stephan 00:28:02] from [inaudible 00:04:02]."
"1652","Stephan: (28:05);Thank you. Foreign secretary, thousands of small businesses across the country are waiting on advice about when [inaudible 00:28:12] will be in practice. Can you say today if there will be wage relief for all those businesses by this month’s payday? And furthermore, with only 1000 business lines so far agreed upon by banks through your business loan scheme, does this show that banks are [inaudible 00:28:34] to loan out to businesses? And what more can the government do to ensure that banks act in the national interest through this time?"
"1653","Dominic Raab: (28:42);Well, the chancellor’s already announced a 330 billion pound package to support businesses right the way through to employees. He will set out the further detail as necessary, as soon as practical. Of course, we do want to encourage banks to be lending and providing the liquidity, particularly that small and medium size businesses need, so that is important and we do want that message along with the support we’ve given to small businesses and banks, to be conveyed as clearly as possible and to be [inaudible 00:29:10]."
"1654","Stephan: (29:10);Just as a follow-up, I do understand that have said this to banks and you have said that it is important to act on this, but is there anything you can actually do to twist the arms of banks to ensure they do act in this way?"
"1655","Dominic Raab: (29:23);Well, the treasury ministers are in regular contact with the banks. We’re looking at both what they need, but also critically, how we get the finance to the businesses which are viable but are just struggling with the challenge of coronavirus. And we want to make sure, particularly those vulnerable small businesses and medium size businesses can see their way through this crisis. And I know the chancellor and the treasury team are doing everything they can to make sure that that can be done. Thank you all very much."
"1656","Rishi Sunak: (00:00);… where his condition is improving. I can also tell you that he has been sitting up in bed and engaging positively with the clinical team. The prime minister is not only my colleague and my boss, but also my friend and my thoughts are with him and his family. The news about the PM reminds us how indiscriminate this disease is. Nearly everyone will know someone who’s been affected. Friends, family, neighbors, colleagues. This is a terrible virus that respects no boundaries of status or geography or vocation."
"1657","Rishi Sunak: (00:38);But we are not facing it alone. We are all taking part in a collective national effort to protect the vulnerable and each other to secure our public services and to save lives. This endeavor is underpinned by an important, simple idea that we depend on each other. When you need it, when you fall on hard times, we will all as one society be there for you to take care of you until you are once again ready to take care of yourself and others. This idea has been central to all of our efforts to support people and businesses during this crisis. We promise to do whatever it takes and I am striving every day to keep that promise."
"1658","Rishi Sunak: (01:36);But when I say we all depend on each other, I don’t just mean the relationship between individuals, businesses and the state. One of our greatest strengths as a country is our civil society, the local charities who provides so much compassion, care and community to the most vulnerable in our country. You have not been forgotten. British people, businesses and foundations are already doing their part to support our charity sector. And today we in government will do our part as we build on our plan for the economy with a plan to support our social fabric."
"1659","Rishi Sunak: (02:19);There are nearly 170,000 charities in this country and the truth is we will not be able to match every pound of funding that they would have received this year. Charities can already use many of our existing schemes to support people and to protect their staff. All charities are eligible for the job retention scheme and in line with medical advice and just like any other employer, the right answer for many charities will be to furlough their employees."
"1660","Rishi Sunak: (02:49);But some charities are on the front line of fighting the Coronavirus and others provide critical services and support to vulnerable people and communities. For them, shutting up shop at this moment would be to contravene their very purpose, their entire reason to exist. Those charities have never been more needed than they are now and they’ve never faced such a sudden fall in their funding. So today I’m announcing £750 million of funding for the charity sector. £370 million of that funding will support small, local charities working with vulnerable people. We all know who they are. Those small charities in our villages, our market towns, in pockets of our cities. The unsung heroes looking after the vulnerable and holding together our social fabric."
"1661","Rishi Sunak: (03:46);In England, this support will be provided through organizations like the National Lottery Community’s Fund and we will allocate £60 million of this funding through the Barnett formula to Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. The UK government will also provide £360 million directly to charities providing essential services and supporting vulnerable people as we battle the Coronavirus. Up to £200 million of those grants will support hospices with the rest going to organizations like St. John’s Ambulance and the Citizens Advice Bureau as well as charities supporting vulnerable children, victims of domestic abuse or disabled people."
"1662","Rishi Sunak: (04:29);And last night the BBC announced their Big Night In charity appeal on April the 23rd. and today I can confirm that the government will match pound for pound whatever the public decides to donate, starting with at least £20 million to the National Emergencies Trust Appeal."
"1663","Rishi Sunak: (04:54);Two short weeks ago, I spoke of the need for kindness, decency and the sort of neighborliness that is at the heart of these charitable and community efforts. The normally invisible connections between us have in recent weeks become more apparent. For most of us, we spend our lives oblivious to these connections, these bonds, and how our behaviors, however small, can have a dramatic effect on others. But these bonds are not invisible for our local charities. For the volunteer, keeping victims of domestic violence safe. For the outreach worker, helping a rough sleeper find a bed or for the support worker manning the phones to help stave off the heart wrenching loneliness so many of our elderly relatives and friends will be experiencing right now."
"1664","Rishi Sunak: (05:45);These connections might be hard to see, but they are there and they are strengthened by our compassion for others. Charities embody this like no other organization and their lesson is that the simplest acts have the potential to change lives. At this time when many are hurting and tired and confined, we need the gentleness of charities in our lives. It gives us hope. It makes us stronger and it reminds us we depend on each other. Thank you. If we could now take some questions, I believe. Angela, were you going to present your slides first?"
"1665","Angela McLean: (06:37);If I may."
"1666","Rishi Sunak: (06:37);Perfect."
"1667","Angela McLean: (06:38);I wanted to start by showing this data, which is a record of how much we’ve acted together to reduce how much we contact each other. So what’s shown here is footfall at 17 stations across the country counting how many people pass through their stations at different times through the month of March. And what you see is that at the end of March, footfall was down 94% compared to the first week of March. And in the next slide, what you can see is that that has worked in the sense that this count of new cases in the UK day by day over the last few weeks is not accelerating out of control. Yesterday there were 5,492 new cases and the spread of this virus is not accelerating, and that is good news. If I could have the next slide please."
"1668","Angela McLean: (07:43);What’s recorded here is people in hospital beds with COVID and the highest of those lines is London and the one just below in gray is the Midlands. What this is is a slower responding record of new infections because of course once people are in hospital, some of them will have to stay there for many days, some of them for some weeks. But again, what we see is that the rate at which this is rising is definitely getting slower and it looks like we’re beginning to get towards a flat curve there, which is of course what we’ve all wanted."
"1669","Angela McLean: (08:23);Our overall aim has always been to make sure that everybody can have access to critical care if they need it and that’s what’s shown on the next slide is COVID patients in critical care. Back one please. Can I get back one please? No, okay. This one here. Yes, thank you. And there we can see encouraging news that perhaps at least in some parts of the country, this really has started to flatten. Across the country, in the last 24 hours, this has increased by just 4%. And again, that is good news because this is our most limiting resource at the moment."
"1670","Angela McLean: (09:09);So finally, I have data on the sad statistic of people who have died from COVID, and this is an international comparison across different countries showing how that number accumulates in different countries. And UK is the dark blue line somewhere in the middle there. This data has long reporting lags and even after the number of people in critical care stabilizes or even maybe begins to fall, this number will rise because sometimes deaths are reported many, many days or even a week or so after sadly somebody has died. So we expect this number to keep rising even after the curve has flattened. Thank you Chancellor."
"1671","Rishi Sunak: (09:54);Thank you. Stephen, anything you wanted to add?"
"1672","Stephen Powis: (09:57);Maybe a word on charities. So in the NHS we work very closely with our partners in the charitable section and I know it’s really important that not only we all support them during this difficult time, but it’s also really important to recognize the support that they are giving everybody to help them through the time where we are asking people to stay at home and take the measures that we have indicated. I have the real privilege at NHS England of leading the cardiovascular, that’s heart attacks and stroke strategy. Two charities I work very closely with: the British Heart Foundation, the Stroke Association, and I know they would want me to say today, to remind everybody that the NHS has worked night and day to surge capacity to manage Coronavirus. But it is also there for you if you have symptoms of a stroke, symptoms of a heart attack. Indeed, if you have any emergency condition, whether it’s a sick child, whether it’s a mother, or a mother in pregnancy who’s worried about the movements of the baby, you should be seeking emergency…"
"1673","Stephen Powis: (11:03);… services just as you always have done. They are there for you and although we are focusing on Coronavirus, it’s important that we also continue to focus on other emergency conditions."
"1674","Rishi Sunak: (11:18);Thank you, Steve. If we take some questions, I think first up is Laura Kuenssberg from BBC."
"1675","Laura Kuenssberg: (11:24);Thank you, Chancellor. You keep saying whatever it takes to help people through this time and with support from the economy. But do you accept, Chancellor, that under the lockdown there is a tradeoff between protecting people’s health and protecting people’s jobs?"
"1676","Rishi Sunak: (11:40);Thanks, Laura. Well, I think we’ve been clear. Our priority is to protect people’s lives, their health and wellbeing. That is our absolute overriding priority. But alongside that, in a coordinated, I think, coherent and consistent fashion, we have also put in place unprecedented and significant measures to protect people’s jobs, their incomes, their livelihoods, and the businesses that employ them. I think that’s the right approach. What it does, it means that we can mitigate as much of the economic impact as possible and ensure that as soon as we can get through this, that we can bounce back as quickly as possible. Was there anything that you wanted to follow up on for either of anyone else?"
"1677","Laura Kuenssberg: (12:26);Yeah. Do you accept though that some people are falling through the cracks? I mean, the Treasury Select committee this afternoon has said that you need to take urgent action for some people who aren’t covered by your very extensive scheme. Do you think the public should be prepared for a serious downturn, maybe even a recession?"
"1678","Rishi Sunak: (12:42);I think I’ve been very clear and very honest that this will have a significant impact on our economy. That’s not uncommon with every other major country that’s grappling with this. We will all see a significant impact on our economy. And I’ve also been very honest that in spite of what are unprecedented measures in scale and scope, I can’t stand here and say that I can save every single job, protect every single business or indeed every single charity, the focus of today’s announcements. That’s just simply not possible. But what we can do is put in place what I think is an enormous amount of support in a targeted fashion as best as possible to help as many people as possible get through this so that as I said, we can emerge on the other side of it stronger, united, and hopefully able to bounce back as quickly as possible. I think if we turn next to, is it Tom Clark from ITV? Tom, are you there?"
"1679","Tom Clark: (13:36);Hello, yes, I am. Thank you, Chancellor. My question relates to testing. Yesterday’s briefing with the Chief Medical Officer may be honest admission that Germany’s lower death toll in their pandemic is due to their ability to test more people more quickly. Given that death toll is three times lower than ours, is it now time for the government to come out and admit that thousands of people have died and thousands more people will die in this country as a result of our failure to test more people more rapidly?"
"1680","Rishi Sunak: (14:10);Would you comment to testing?"
"1681","Stephen Powis: (14:11);To be honest, I don’t think that’s what the Chief Medical Officer did say. I think he said that tasting was one of many factors, and I think the Chief Scientific Advisor spoke about this too, was one of a range of things in Germany. I think it’s difficult at this stage to say what range of factors has contributed to what. I think the Chief Medical Officer was also making clear that it’s important that all countries learn from each other. I’ve no doubt that other countries will want to learn from our experience and some of the things that we have done in the United Kingdom, for instance, the work on modeling and predicting what the epidemic might do. I think the point he was making yesterday was that everybody should be learning from each other. Indeed, that is what we’re doing. Angela might have more to say on that."
"1682","Angela: (14:58);Yes, I would have thought the point would be that the rate of deaths, of course, appears much lower if you can count many, many more of the cases. That’s certainly one of the things that you see. If you see different case fatality rates in countries, that could be because you’re counting many, many more of the people who should be on the bottom of that fraction. In terms of modeling, that is something that we’re really very happy in this country to offer to other countries and hope that’s one of the things we can contribute to the international effort."
"1683","Rishi Sunak: (15:31);Thank you, Tom. I hope, I hope that …"
"1684","Tom Clark: (15:35);Like you, I just sat through the Select Committee hearing on which you were a witness. We heard from the people in charged of testing in South Korea and in Hong Kong. They made it abundantly clear testing has reduced the numbers of cases of Coronavirus in those countries. Dr. Whitty did say yesterday that it was, in fact, Germany’s tests that was part of their lower death rates. We had less than certain. He did not speak of that. It is about testing. Can you tell me whether our inability to test will lead to greater mortality here? Can I also follow-up? How dependent is the UK on a testing regime, for us to be able to lift lockdown restrictions and are we on course to have the sufficient levels of testing in the community to allow us to do that in anything like the next three or four weeks?"
"1685","Stephen Powis: (16:27);I think we all agree that testing is important. That is not the issue at all. I think the point I was making is that testing is one part of a set of different things that will need to be considered in any country’s strategy. That is the case here. It is the case in Germany. I have spoken to Chief Medical Officer today and I think, well, I know the point he was making yesterday, was it is a part of the overall strategy. I think it is almost certainly too early, in all countries’ experience, to know exactly which components or strategies have been the most effective or have been most important. It’s highly likely it’s the combination of these things rather than one any individual part of an approach."
"1686","Rishi Sunak: (17:12);Brilliant. Thank you. Tom. Can we turn to Andy Bell from Channel 5?"
"1687","Andy Bell: (17:16);Yes, thank you. I want to follow up partly on Tom’s question about the lockdown but in a different context, which is the First Minister of Wales has said today that as far as he’s concerned a lockdown is going to continue beyond next week in Wales. Can you level with us now and just accept that the lockdown is going to continue across the U.K. through next week? From a scientific and medical point of view, is it possible or even desirable that different parts of the country could come out of lockdown at different speeds?"
"1688","Rishi Sunak: (17:52);Let me address that before handing over, Andy. I can just say there will be a cover meeting tomorrow chaired by the First Secretary of State involving the devolved administrations to talk about the approach to the review. We committed that there would be a review in and around three weeks. That review will be based on the evidence and the data provided by Sage, which will only be available next week. But I think rather than speculate about the future, I think we should focus very seriously on the here and now and the present. I think there the messages unequivocal. Our priority right now is to stop the spread of this virus, to get the the other side of the peak. And the best way to do that is for people to follow the advice, which is to stay at home, protect lives, and protect the NHS."
"1689","Rishi Sunak: (18:39);I think, in terms of messaging, I would want to be absolutely unequivocal about that. That’s where we are now. That’s the advice people should be following. That’s the best thing that we can all do to help get through this as quickly as possible. But Angela, if you wanted to add anything on that."
"1690","Angela: (18:53);We have always said that we would need to be able to see what impact the whole suite of interventions that were brought into place on the 23rd of March are having before we can make any evidence-based decision on what to do next. This week is a really important week. We’re all watching what happens. I guess from a purely scientific point of view, more data is better for us. But I completely agree with the Chancellor that what really matters is that people stay home, protect lives, and save the NHS. Or is it the other way around?"
"1691","Rishi Sunak: (19:31);Brilliant. And I hope, does that answer your question?"
"1692","Andy Bell: (19:34);I’d just like to come back to the idea of whether different parts of the country could theoretically emerge at different times from lockdown. Whether that’s, first of all, politically possible, and secondly, whether that’s in any way scientifically or medically desirable."
"1693","Rishi Sunak: (19:50);I think what I’d probably say before handing over to Angela on the medical issues, I think, again, I don’t want to start speculating about the future. I think that’s not helpful at this juncture. I think the key thing now is for people to focus unequivocally on the advice. We are where we are in this process, and the advice is clear. People should follow the advice. That’s the best thing that everyone can do wherever they live in this country at the moment. I think Angela probably would echo that."
"1694","Angela: (20:16);I would echo that. I don’t want to get into hypotheticals about what might be better one way or another. I suspect that simple strategies might well turn out to be the best to use, but we’ll see and I’m going to get it right this time. The advice is for Easter weekend to stay home, protect the NHS, and save lives. So I will certainly be having my Easter at home."
"1695","Rishi Sunak: (20:39);Thank you, Andy. Gary Gibbon from Channel 4."
"1696","Andy Gibbon: (20:44);Thank you. Chancellor, can I ask you. We’ve had unemployment figures from one European country so far, post-COVID crisis: Norway. Unemployment, well over 10%. From the data you look at in the Treasury, can you hand on heart say we’re not going to see something like that here?"
"1697","Rishi Sunak: (21:05);Gary, I will be absolutely honest, this will have a significant impact on our economy and not in an abstract way. It will have an impact on people’s jobs and their livelihoods and that’s why we’ve taken the actions that we have in order to help mitigate some of that. I believe that, for example, the job retention scheme, the furlough scheme that we’ve put in place, which we’ve never had anything like in this country. As I said, when I stood here to announce it, the government is stepping in to help pay people’s wages so that they’re not laid off, so they don’t end up being unemployed, that they remain attached to their company, with a very significant safety net behind them that helps the company, that helps the person, that helps their family finances. I think that, and to combine with all the other measures we’ve taken, will significantly help mitigate some of the impact."
"1698","Rishi Sunak: (21:51);I think that’s what other commentators have said as well. That if we weren’t doing all the things that we’re doing, if we won’t put in place these unprecedented measures, it would certainly be worse. I believe we’re doing the right things. I can’t-"
"1699","Rishi Sunak: (22:03);… stand here and say that there isn’t going to be hardship ahead. There is, which is why going through this together as one society united, understanding that everyone’s got a role to play, whether that’s government, business, charities, your next door neighbor. I think that’s the best approach to this, but I’m confident we will get through it."
"1700","Speaker 2: (22:21);Is some of that … Is some of the data from surveys already coming in outstripping your expectations? You mentioned the furloughs scheme, some suggestion that there could be people applying for that, businesses applying for that way in excess, maybe, in treasury expectations. Did you ever think you could be forking out say 40 billion over three months, which could be the number, couldn’t it?"
"1701","Rishi Sunak: (22:44);Well, I think just to clarify on that, we have not put out a specific projection or an estimate of the take up of that scheme and I think there was some reporting that we might have and this might be an assessment, so we haven’t actually done that for the simple reason … This is an unprecedented situation, so of course we have a range of scenarios that might come our way, but there isn’t a precise central estimate of of what the scheme might do. What I would say is you’re right, there is other data that we can look at and I think others and myself have talked about universal credit claims which have come down from where they were 10 days ago, which is comforting, but they’re still very elevated relative to what normal levels might be, sometimes four or five times higher."
"1702","Rishi Sunak: (23:24);That is obviously something we look at and that’s why we’ve not only strengthened the safety net and put extra money to the tune of seven billion pounds plus into the welfare system for those who are accessing universal credit. We’ve also provided more funding to DWP, for example, to help them process those claims and make sure people get the support as quickly as they need. But I say when it comes to the job retention scheme, people who are put on that scheme at whatever scale, to me that’s the scheme working. The idea is that we did that so that people were not laid off, they were not unemployed, they had a good income to get them through this and they remain attached to their company and their employer. So if it ends up being significantly used I will view that as a success if it means that we get through this and then can bounce back quickly and provide security to those people and their families during it. Thank you. I think next Piper Quier at The Daily Mirror?"
"1703","Piper Quier: (24:24);We all know that the focus now … The focus now is currently on following the advice, rightly, but I’ve spoken to head teachers and parents and MPs who are very keen to reopen schools as soon as the scientific advice suggests that it’s safe to do so. So can I ask Professor McLean whether … Despite the focus on the advice now, whether she could give us any indication of where schools might be open before the summer holidays, which after all are three months away, and the chancellor, if I can ask you how significant a factor are schools in your discussions about getting the economy back on its feet once we’re through the other side of this?"
"1704","Speaker 3: (25:12);I’m happy to answer that by saying there’s very intensive work going on to think about all sorts of different things that we might do in the next stage. It would be completely premature for me to give a yes or no answer to that question because so much depends on this question of how well have the measures put in on March the 23rd worked, and we can’t know that this week until we see a longer run of infections that have happened since that time. But please be assured that people are working incredibly hard to explore those sorts of questions."
"1705","Rishi Sunak: (25:48);Yeah, Piper, I probably can’t add much to what Angela said is that we are … In all these instances we are driven and basing our decisions on the science and what is best for controlling the spread of this virus and getting that [inaudible 00:26:02] number down. That’s been our approach to this thing all along and that will continue to be our approach. And I pay tribute to those who are helping keep our schools open for children of key workers. That is is valuable, and the work that they’re doing is, I believe, well supported by the Department of Education, but they also are owed our thanks for doing that, because that is vital at this time."
"1706","Piper Quier: (26:24);Can I come back?"
"1707","Rishi Sunak: (26:25);Yeah, of course."
"1708","Piper Quier: (26:27);I mean, I can understand that obviously the data and the science suggested it’s too soon to see. But Mr. Paris was talking just days ago about green shoots and so the beginnings of signs of the curve flattening, was that premature?"
"1709","Stephen Powis: (26:41);No, I don’t think so because I think what I said last week was that the green shoots were occurring in some of the early things that we were seeing, such as the reduction in transport, the reduction in footfall that we describe in these press conferences, which recognizes that the British public is complying with instructions. And, as we’ve said, the message is we need to continue complying with those instructions on social distancing. So, so those green shoots over time translate into benefit in a reduction in the number of infections, a reduction in the number of hospitalizations, and then sadly, finally, into a reduction in the number of deaths. And I think as you have heard from Angela at the start of this press conference, we are starting to see a plateauing, the first signs of a plateauing infections and hospitalizations."
"1710","Stephen Powis: (27:33);If we had not taken those measures, if people had not complied with them, we would not be seeing that. We would be seeing an exponential curve and a set of graphs that were steeply rising. So we are beginning to see the benefits, I believe. But the really critical thing is that we have to continue following instructions. We have to continue following social distancing because if we don’t, the virus will start to spread again. And if it starts to spread again, then in a week or two’s time we will be seeing a set of figures which are not going in the direction that we want to see them. We will see increased pressure on the NHS, we will see increased numbers of deaths."
"1711","Stephen Powis: (28:12);So this is not the time to become complacent. It’s not the time to think that the job has been done. This is the time to continue everybody continuing, whether, whether you’re me, whether your member of the public, frankly, whether you’re a football team, to continue to keep with social distancing and ensure that the hard work and that the hardship that that everybody is no doubt encountering leads to those benefits. That’s a simple message today and you’ve heard it time and time again and there are no apologies for giving it."
"1712","Rishi Sunak: (28:46);Great. Thank you Piper. Could we go next to … Is it Nathan Hall from The Express or no?"
"1713","Nathan Hall: (28:52);Yes. Thank you chancellor. I’m just back to your job retention scheme. The head of revenue and customs has today warned that the scheme is open to fraud and abuse. Have you had any evidence that that is happening and would you urge employees to blow the whistle on firms that may be abusing this scheme?"
"1714","Rishi Sunak: (29:09);Yep, thanks. Look, what I would say is we’re obviously designing schemes at pace which haven’t been done before, and part of the reason that we’ve made some of the decisions that we’ve made in the design, whether it’s the job retention scheme or the self-employed, are deliberately to counter fraud, because obviously we want to make them as simple as possible and as accessible to as many people as possible whilst protecting the tax payer. Because ultimately this is all of our money that would need to be paid back at some point. So we want to make sure it’s targeted on people who really need it, and that has actually influenced some of the design choices we’ve made. That means some people might fall between the cracks. That means that there are people who are saying, “Well, can you not do it this way? Can you include us?”"
"1715","Rishi Sunak: (29:48);And the reason we’ve not been able to do that is to protect against exactly that, exactly the risk of fraud or spurious claims that we won’t be able to verify or only verify with a very cumbersome manual process, which would delay the scheme’s implementation, which I think is not the right thing. So I’m confident that the decisions we’ve made will minimize the risk of fraud. Obviously the team are hard at work at the moment getting these schemes up and running and we will have as robust verification and auditing processes as possible to ensure that there isn’t fraud and that we can go and tackle it. But that’s why we’ve made some of the choices we’ve made and hopefully that … People will understand that and they hopefully have been reasonable about that when I’ve explained, well, this is why you have to be employed, for example, on this particular day."
"1716","Rishi Sunak: (30:33);Because if you weren’t, then obviously there is the risk that you could create a brand new employment for someone who we’ve never heard of before and suddenly start getting money from the taxpayer for not a genuine case. And so that’s, for example, one of the reasons that we picked a cutoff date of February the 28th for that particular scheme, big part of that was preventing fraud. So hopefully that’s clear and Jim and the HMRC and his team are doing a fantastic job getting these things up and running. I think he talked a little bit about timing and we’re on track to deliver against the timelines that I outlined earlier, which is pleasing because this is a huge challenge for them and they’re doing a great job. Does that answer what you wanted?"
"1717","Nathan Hall: (31:13);Thank you."
"1718","Rishi Sunak: (31:13);Perfect. Thank you. James Taxfield, Mail Online?"
"1719","James Taxfield: (31:19);Thank you, chancellor. Churchill had a personal doctor and president Trump has a medical team, but the prime minister was left with persistent symptoms Rover a week and was only admitted to hospital after a video call with a GP. There doesn’t seem to have been a great deal of social distancing going on in Downing Street. Haven’t we failed to protect our key decision makers, and what needs to change for the future? Should we be more of a US style system with more protection?"
"1720","Rishi Sunak: (31:46);Well, I think I’ll … I’ll defer to Steve in a second, but I would say that I think the prime minister has received excellent care and advice every step of the process. At the end of the day, no matter … We’re all trying our absolute best, but none of us are superhuman and impervious to getting sick during this process. And that’s what makes this whole thing so awful for all of us. But as I’ve observed and seen, the advice, the care has been excellent. Not just beforehand but especially now at St. Thomas’s. [inaudible 00:32:15] if there’s anything you want to add."
"1721","Stephen Powis: (32:15);I’m actually confident the prime minister has and is receiving excellent medical care. I’m not his physician, he will have been advised by his own doctors, but I do know colleagues at St. Thomas’s Hospital. In fact, a couple of weeks ago I took the opportunity to visit St. Thomas’s Hospital visits, some of the critical care consultants, and I can’t tell you how impressed I was, and this is going back a few weeks, at the preparations that they were making, the details that they were thinking through in terms of how they would deal with an increase in patients with coronavirus. They are amongst the best critical care clinicians in the world. St. Thomas’s, even when I was a junior doctor many years ago, was world-"
"1722","Stephen Powis: (33:03);… renowned for its critical care capacity. So I’m absolutely confident, absolutely confident, that my colleagues, all the clinical staff, doctors, nurses, and everybody else at Saint Thomas’s is providing exceptional world-class care."
"1723","Rishi Sunak: (33:20);Brilliant. Thank you, Steve. Does that answer your question?"
"1724","Press Corps: (33:24);I was just going to say the point on the Downing Street social distancing, in hindsight, do you think that that could have been more rigorously observed there?"
"1725","Rishi Sunak: (33:32);Well I think … Look, everyone is doing their best to follow the guidelines, whether it’s cabinet, we’ve conducted, I think for the first ever time, meetings via alternative means. And people are appropriately following all the guidance. That doesn’t mean that we can completely eliminate the spread of infection in this process. But I think the good news is, as I said, there’s good update on the prime minister’s condition. Those that have been away are, many of them now, returning to work. But I think whether people are away, or social distancing, or physically in the same place, the business of government, throughout all of this, has gone on, and it has gone on at pace. And the team, whether it’s politicians, cabinet ministers, civil servants, doctors and medical advisers are working night and day to make sure that we do what we need to to get the country through this and support the British people at this time. I can absolutely give you that assurance."
"1726","Rishi Sunak: (34:24);Thank you. Can we turn to Tim Ross from Bloomberg? Tim, are you there?"
"1727","Tim Ross: (34:30);Hello, yes. Chancellor, you say the prime minister is improving. Do you expect to see him able to leave hospital next week sometime? What are your expectations there?"
"1728","Tim Ross: (34:42);Also on Brexit, Chancellor, you have said before that your very honest about the risks to the economy and the fact there will be a really significant impact, potentially a recession later this year. Do you really think it’s a good idea to leave the European Union if the UK economy is in, or just coming out of, a very deep recession?"
"1729","Tim Ross: (35:01);And then to your two colleagues, the decision on whether to persist with the lockdown measures will be taken, [inaudible 00:02:07], you’re saying next week probably sometime. What will the full range of data that you’re analyzing be in order to take that decision? And are we at the beginning of the peak now? How far off is your best guess?"
"1730","Rishi Sunak: (35:26);If I could start, I think you talked about, ” Should we still leave the European Union?” I think. I mean, we have left the European Union, that has happened. What we’re doing now is just negotiating the final terms of our trading arrangements. That work is carrying on. And David Frost, the prime minister’s chief sherpa in this regard, held talks earlier this week with the deputy counterpart over at the EU. They’ve exchanged legal texts. They’ve set out some clarification that they both wanted from each other. And indeed I think David is talking to his direct counterpart, either later this week or next week, to plan the next steps for the meetings and continued negotiations over April and May. So I think we remain committed to the timeline of concluding those talks and negotiations. That work is happening, albeit over video conference rather than in person. So I think that’s a pretty clear statement of where we are on that."
"1731","Rishi Sunak: (36:22);Angela, do want to take the question on that?"
"1732","Angela: (36:24);Yes, very happy to take that question."
"1733","Angela: (36:26);So one of the great strengths of the kinds of mathematical modeling that Sage is drawing on in order to give its advice is that it lets you pull together information from all sorts of different data streams. So my colleagues who are generating that advice will be using hard data on things like numbers of people arriving at hospital, numbers of people having to be admitted to critical care in hospital. But also things like that data on how many people are there in stations, survey data asking people, “Well precisely what behaviors have you toned down in the last few weeks?”"
"1734","Angela: (37:02);So I could actually bore you by telling you how many different data streams are under consideration. But that is the strength of that approach, is it lets you take a lot of different kinds of information and do the best job you can of synthesizing them together in order to understand the situation we have been in, in the past, that has brought us to where we are now, and then do what you can to project into the future what’s going to happen next."
"1735","Angela: (37:27);But I’m not going to do that right now because that’s something that we do in a rather formal process. The model has come to Sage, and then Sage puts that together, and we send it over to our politicians in order to make decisions."
"1736","Rishi Sunak: (37:43);Do you have anything you wanted to add finally?"
"1737","Stephen Powis: (37:43);As you know, Sage has been publishing its material so that is available, and I think also to add that many of the academic groups that contribute to Sage publish their own research and modeling independently. And so that is there for all to see in terms of those key academic groups."
"1738","Rishi Sunak: (38:01);Brilliant. Thank you. Well if I could possibly wrap up. Thank you Tim for that, and just say thank you to Angela. Thank you, Steve, for answering all the questions."
"1739","Rishi Sunak: (38:12);Our announcement today was about supporting charities, who are a critical part of the social fabric of this country. It builds on the economic plan that we’ve already announced to protect people’s health and economic security by supporting public services like our NHS, backing business, and protecting people’s jobs and incomes. And if I could conclude by saying this: Our economic plan, and the plan for charities that we announced today, are built on one simple idea, that we depend on each other. Thank you."
"1740","Boris Johnson: (00:00);As we said last week, our objective is to delay and flatten the peak of the epidemic by bringing forward the right measures at the right time so that we minimize suffering and save life, and everything we do is based scrupulously on the best scientific advice."
"1741","Boris Johnson: (00:22);Last week we asked everyone to stay at home if you had one of two key symptoms: a high temperature or a new and continuous cough. Today we need to go further because, according to SAGE, the Scientific Advisory Committee on Emergencies, it looks as though we’re now approaching the fast growth part of the upward curve. And without drastic action, cases could double every five or six days. So, first, we need to ask you to ensure that if you or anyone in your household has one of those two symptoms, then you should stay at home for 14 days. That means that, if possible, you should not go out even to buy food or essentials other than for exercise, and in that case, at a safe distance from others. If necessary, you should ask for help from others for your daily necessities. And if that is not possible, then you should do what you can to limit your social contact when you leave the house to get supplies."
"1742","Boris Johnson: (01:45);And even if you don’t have symptoms and if no one in your household has symptoms, there is more that we need you to do now. So, second, now is the time for everyone to stop non-essential contact with others and to stop all unnecessary travel. We need people to start working from home where they possibly can. And you should avoid pubs, clubs, theaters, and other such social venues. It goes to that saying, repeat the message, we should all only use the NHS when we really need to, and please go online rather than ringing NHS 111."
"1743","Boris Johnson: (02:36);Now, this advice about avoiding all unnecessary social contact is particularly important for people over 70, for pregnant women, and for those with some health conditions. And if you ask, “Well, why are we doing this now? Why now? Why not earlier or later? Why bring in this very draconian measure,” the answer is that we are asking people to do something that is difficult and disruptive of their lives. And the right moment, as we’ve always said, is to do it when it is most effective, when we think it can make the biggest difference to slowing the spread of the disease, reducing the number of victims, reducing the number of fatalities. And as we take these steps, we should be focusing on the most vulnerable. So, third, in a few days time, by this coming weekend, it will be necessary to go further and to ensure that those with the most serious health conditions are largely shielded from social contact for around 12 weeks. And again, the reason for doing this in the next few days rather than earlier or later is that this is going to be very disruptive for people who have such conditions, difficult for them, but I believe it’s now necessary."
"1744","Boris Johnson: (04:10);And we want to ensure that this period of shielding, this period of maximum protection coincides with the peak of the disease. And it’s now clear that the peak of the epidemic is coming faster in some parts of the country than in others, and it looks as though London is now a few weeks ahead. So to relieve the pressure on the London health system and to slow the spread in London, it’s important that Londoners now pay special attention to what we’re saying about avoiding non-essential contact and to take particularly seriously the advice about working from home and avoiding confined spaces such as pubs and restaurants. Lastly, it remains true, as we said in the last few weeks, that risks of transmission of the disease at mass gatherings, such as sporting events, are relatively low. But obviously, logically, as we advise against unnecessary social contact of all kinds, it’s right that we should extend that advice to mass gatherings as well."
"1745","Boris Johnson: (05:26);And so we’ve also got to ensure that we have the critical workers we need that might otherwise be deployed at those gatherings to deal with this emergency. So, from tomorrow we will no longer be supporting mass gatherings with emergency workers in the way that we normally do. So mass gatherings, we are now moving emphatically away from."
"1746","Boris Johnson: (05:53);And I know that many people, including millions of fit and active people over 70, may feel, listening to what I’ve just said, that there is something excessive about these measures. But I have to say I believe they are overwhelmingly worth it to slow the spread of the disease, to reduce the peak, to save life, minimize suffering, and to give our NHS the chance to cope."
"1747","Boris Johnson: (06:29);Over the last few days, I’ve been comparing notes and talking to leaders around the world, and I can tell you that the UK is now leading a growing global campaign amongst all our friends and allies, whether in the G7, the G20, the UN, the IMF, all those bodies in which we play a significant role. We’re leading a campaign to fight back against this disease, to keep the economy growing, to make sure that humanity has access to the drugs and the treatments that we all need. And the UK is also at the front of the effort to back our business, to back our economy, to make sure that we get through it."
"1748","Boris Johnson: (07:14);I know that we are today asking a lot of everybody. This is far more now than just washing your hands, though clearly, washing your hands remains important. But I can tell you that across this country, people and businesses, in my experience, are responding with amazing energy and creativity to the challenge that we face. And I want to thank everybody for the part that you are playing and that you’re going to play."
"1749","Boris Johnson: (07:45);Our chief scientific advisor will now update us on where we are. Over to you, Patrick."
"1750","Patrick Vallance: (07:50);Thank you. We’ve looked all along SAGE at measures that can save lives and protect people. The objectives, as I laid out last time, are to really suppress the curve in order to keep it below NHS capacity so that the NHS can cope, and to shield the vulnerable and those most likely to get severe disease so that we protect them across this period. Most people, it’s worth reminding us, have a mild disease, but some do not."
"1751","Patrick Vallance: (08:29);This is a very fast-moving situation. The latest numbers that we reviewed at SAGE suggest that we’re entering a fast-growth period or on the cusp of doing so, and London is ahead of other parts of the country. We at the outset laid out a plan and advised that we would implement it, the measures, at the right stage and in the right combination, the right combination to ensure that we get the biggest impact. Unfortunately, that time is now for many of these measures."
"1752","Patrick Vallance: (09:06);What we’re doing is implementing them actually at a stage of the epidemic which is a little bit earlier than has been done in some other countries given where we are in terms of the epidemic now. The measures have two objectives. One is to delay the transmission of this virus across the community, and the second is to keep people safe."
"1753","Patrick Vallance: (09:32);The measures, as the Prime Minister has outlined, include whole household isolation. So if one person gets the symptoms of new, persistent cough or fever, the whole household stays isolated for 14 days. The reason it’s 14 days is the seven days for the person who’s got the infection, the incubation period that others may catch it, and the seven days after that."
"1754","Patrick Vallance: (10:03);We’re also recommending increased social distancing, that’s the phrase that you hear, which means trying to reduce contact between people. Again, to try to delay this transmission. That means where businesses can do it and where individuals can do it, homeworking is recommended. Unnecessary travel should be reduced and stopped. Avoiding gatherings and crowded places is important. And those gatherings, big or small, are important so that you get the whole thing together. It’s not just the size of a gathering, it’s actually all gatherings which become important. And reducing social contacts."
"1755","Patrick Vallance: (10:46);There are specific measures for the vulnerable groups, the people who are most likely to get serious illness with this infection, and Chris Whitty will say more about that. Those measures would need to go on for 12 weeks or so across this period, maybe a little longer."
"1756","Patrick Vallance: (11:08);These measures, like case isolation that we talked about last week, staying at home if you’ve got the symptoms, these new measures have a big effect. This is not a series of small interventions. You would anticipate that this could have a dramatic effect to reduce the peak and to reduce death rate. They are not easy, but they are important, and they will have the effect if we all do it. This is a matter for us to take accountability, to make sure we help each other, protect ourselves and protect the NHS."
"1757","Patrick Vallance: (11:49);It is also possible, as laid out in the plan, that other measures may be necessary, including at some point, as we’ve said, it may be necessary to think about things like school closures, but those things, again, need to be done at the right time, in the right way, at the right stage of the outbreak. I’ll hand over to Chris."
"1758","Chris Whitty: (12:12);Thank you. I’m just going to add a few comments additionally from a medical point of view, but I’m not going to repeat points that have already been made. And the first thing is to make an obvious point that this is now a very global disease, and the way you deal with global pandemics is different in public health terms than the way you would deal with a localized outbreak where you’re the first country or a very significant region that has got it."
"1759","Chris Whitty: (12:40);And the second point is the obvious point again, that in this country, this disease is now accelerating up the curve, but it is still at a low level, but it will accelerate up now really quite rapidly."
"1760","Chris Whitty: (12:54);Now, we obviously need to do things that are both effective, and all the measures that are here have been gone over by several large numbers of scientists in different ways, looking at mathematical models, behavioral sciences, many other forms of science to find the things which are the most effective. But they also have to be sustainable because this is going to go on for some time. And I think we should not be under any illusions that if we just do this for a couple of weeks, that is sufficient. This is going to have to be prolonged period."
"1761","Chris Whitty: (13:27);Let me start off with the most cheery point about this. For any individual person, the chances of dying from coronavirus are actually very low. Some people will not get the infection, and many of the measures we’re doing at the moment will help with that. Some people will get it and will have no symptoms at all. They won’t even realize they’ve had it. Of those who do have symptoms, the majority will have either a mild disease or a moderate disease, meaning they can easily manage it at home without having to go to the NHS directly or indirectly in any other way."
"1762","Chris Whitty: (14:09);But obviously, a small minority, but a significant one, get significant disease requiring hospital care. A small proportion of those will go on to need intensive care. And sadly, some people will go on to die. And as we’ve discussed before, the overall mortality rate looks as if it’s a bit less than 1% on current data, but that’s without knowing how many people get the disease asymptomatically, but we know some people get it."
"1763","Chris Whitty: (14:39);Now, we also know that older people are at greater risk, and that is widely known. But it is important, I think, to stress that being old does not necessarily mean you’ll get it worse. And actually, there was a rather nice article by my minister, Nadine Dorries, who actually explained when she had coronavirus, her mother, who caught it from her, had it more mildly. So it’s not a necessary fact that older people will necessarily have it worse."
"1764","Chris Whitty: (15:04);So you might say, “Why, with a disease where we have such small numbers at the moment and which the great majority of people are going to recover from, and most of them will have a mild or non-noticeable disease, would we want to do anything at all?” And the reason is this acceleration. And our overall aim and our single aim is to reduce death rates and the numbers of people who might die as a result of this."
"1765","Chris Whitty: (15:31);But I think it’s important to recognize, and the reason I’m explaining this is so people understand the logic of what we’re doing, that there are broadly three groups of deaths and other impacts on health we need to consider. There are the direct deaths, which are caused by the coronavirus disease itself. With good medical care, tragically, a few people, the great majority of them are in less good health but not necessarily all, will pass away."
"1766","Chris Whitty: (16:02);There are, however, and this is really important, a significant number of other deaths which, if the NHS became overwhelmed in any of the four nations, if the intensive care units got to the point when they were overwhelmed, then people would die from indirect deaths because they did not have the ability to get medical care. And a lot of what we are trying to do is trying to reduce the chance that those indirect deaths might occur."
"1767","Chris Whitty: (16:32);And then the third possibility, and it is an important one for us to consider, is that some of the measures we are doing will undoubtedly or could have negative impacts on people’s health themselves. So there are negative effects of what we do to try and combat the coronavirus. One of the reasons we are very keen not to go in advance of need was because of those negative facts, and I’ll come onto one of them later on."
"1768","Chris Whitty: (16:58);Now, just to explain where the different things fall into this. The very profound changes in terms of social distancing that the Prime Minister laid out, which are going to be very difficult for people to maintain over a long period of time and will have very significant social effects, do have the capacity significantly to pull down the peak of this infection wave and, therefore, make it easier for the NHS and particularly the ventilation support to be able to cope with the wave that is heading its way. So that is really critical. People who do this, who restrict their social gathering, are doing things to protect the NHS, to allow the NHS to treat both people with coronavirus and people who have other things as well. It has overall effect on the NHS."
"1769","Chris Whitty: (17:48);The second group of things which the Prime Minister has laid out are those things that we want the quite large group of people who either are over 70, possibly quite healthy or very healthy over 70, but over 70, or who are younger than 70 but have a significant health condition, and this is mainly in adults, we want them to take even greater care because this is in addition to making sure that they don’t end up helping fuel the epidemic themselves. It means that they do not have to go to hospital, which is good for the NHS. But most importantly, it reduces the risk that they will catch the virus, particularly at a time when the NHS is under strain. This is absolutely critical."
"1770","Chris Whitty: (18:31);And the group of people who we would want to take this advice particularly seriously are older people above 70, people who in adult life would normally be advised to have the flu vaccination, so these are people with chronic diseases such as chronic heart disease or chronic kidney disease, and also as a precautionary measure, because we are early in our understanding of this virus and we want to be sure, women who are pregnant. And those three groups …"
"1771","Chris Whitty: (19:03);Sure, women who are pregnant, and those three groups are the groups we want to take particular care to minimize their social contact, which will of course will have very significant risks for them. And later on, we will be giving a, I think, very shortly a much more specific list of an even smaller group of people who have very profound health problems. They all know they’ve got very profound health problems. For example, people who might have advanced myeloma or leukemia, things that significantly affects their immune system."
"1772","Chris Whitty: (19:35);The final bit that is being talked about today is, in addition to what we’ve previously talked about, is the 14-day stay at home. If one person in the household has symptoms, the whole household stays at home. Now, there has to be some common sense around this. If there’s a very vulnerable person in the household, for example, we’ll need, people will need to take that into account. We’ll need to think, people need to think through the practicalities of their own position, but the reason for this is, because they are helping to stop it be transmitted onto the rest of the community."
"1773","Chris Whitty: (20:12);And these people, the trouble is, if you actually are in a household with someone who’s got coronavirus, there is a reasonably high chance you will be infected, and will go on to get this. So this, is in a sense, some things people are doing to help protect the rest of society."
"1774","Chris Whitty: (20:29);We do want to stress that the great majority of these people will have mild or moderate disease. They don’t need to contact the NHS. They can get, they can use the NHS online service, there’s very sensitive information there. We really would encourage them, not if they have mild or moderate disease, to phone 111, because the service we need to protect, for those who are in greatest need."
"1775","Chris Whitty: (20:54);But, really important distress, if anybody’s health starts to deteriorate significantly, then they should phone 111, or contact the health services, in the way they usually would. So this is if people deteriorate, we’d want to make it clear they should then do so."
"1776","Chris Whitty: (21:12);Finally, I just want to make a point on behalf of my other CMOs, for all four nations. We are enormously proud of what our colleagues in the NHS and public health have done so far to delay this, and to do so in a safe way. An enormous amount of work has gone on to do that."
"1777","Chris Whitty: (21:33);The next few weeks and months are going to be extraordinarily difficult for the NHS in all four nations. We know that our colleagues will rise to this challenge, but we know it is going to be very hard, indeed, but we have enormous faith in them. Thank you very much."
"1778","Boris Johnson: (21:49);Well, thank you very much Chris. So I want to thank both Chris and Patrick immensely for all the work that they’d been doing over the last, a few weeks and months. And I know it’s a big imposition, but we’re going to walk, we’re going to be making sure that we give daily updates to you."
"1779","Boris Johnson: (22:05);I do think that would be valuable, so that we can have, as as I said from the beginning, as much transparency as possible, and really try and show our working and our thinking as clearly as possible to the British public. Questions. Now please, Vicki Young, BBC."
"1780","Vicki Young: (22:26);Prime minister, looking at these measures. Can I ask you about enforcement? Are you closing theaters, pubs, restaurants down, as of today? And a particular question which we’ve heard at the BBC, lots of questions about care homes. Are you going to stop visitors going into care homes? Lots of people are very concerned about that."
"1781","Vicki Young: (22:44);And then, on a more scientific question about testing, the Director General of the World Health Organization has just said, “A clear message to countries, to test, test, test. You cannot fight a fire blindfolded. Test every suspected case.” Lots of people wondering how you can track the pandemic in this country, if you don’t know who’s got it."
"1782","Boris Johnson: (23:05);Yeah, so thanks, Vicki. Well, absolutely, what we’re doing is giving very strong advice that public venues, such as theaters, should no longer be visited. The proprietors of those venues that are taking the logical steps that you’d imagine. You’re seeing the change happen already."
"1783","Boris Johnson: (23:28);As for enforcement, we have the powers, if necessary, but I don’t believe that it will be necessary to use those powers. When it comes to care homes and visitors to care homes, you can take it from what we’ve just said, about avoiding all unnecessary contact for those particular groups."
"1784","Boris Johnson: (23:48);You know, a really strong advice that we’re giving out to people, to avoid unnecessary contact with the over seventies, those with particular health conditions, absolutely. We don’t want to see people unnecessarily visiting care homes."
"1785","Chris Whitty: (24:04);Actually, as to the testing?"
"1786","Boris Johnson: (24:04);Yes, and on the testing. Yeah, absolutely."
"1787","Chris Whitty: (24:06);Oh, of course, we completely agree with the Secretary General that testing is absolutely critical, and within the UK, we have three levels of testing at the moment. We have testing in intensive care systems, which is across the whole system, as it is a complete surveillance system. We have testing in hospitals for people who got pneumonia, for people who got milder disease, and we have the GP network which is testing in the community. The one thing which we did stop doing was testing based on geography, which was early on, because at this stage geography is much less important in a disease. Now, we do intend to continue to scale up testing, but I think it’s important to realize the scale of UK testing, which has been substantial, and just to give, just some numbers on that, over 44,000 tests conducted, of which 40, over 42,000 were negative."
"1788","Chris Whitty: (24:55);And we will continue to up the testing every single week, from here on in, moving out into the wider community. The test we have at the moment only tests for people who currently got disease. The thing which would be transformational would be a test to reliably tell us if someone has previously had disease, so we can pick up and find out, what proportion of people get this infection without any symptoms. Currently, such a test is not reliable, but it’s being developed very rapidly by public health England."
"1789","Boris Johnson: (25:27);Thanks. Beth Ruby’s going to do something on that."
"1790","Beth Ruby: (25:31);Thank you, Prime Minister. This is quite a big step change from where we were even four days ago, but in other Western European countries, in the US, they’re going further still. There’s states of emergency, cities in forced lockdown, families been asked to stay at home, even if they are not ill, schools closed."
"1791","Beth Ruby: (25:52);Are these are sorts of measures you think the public should expect in the next few days? And if I may, Sir Patrick, a question for you, you just talked about London, when do you think London will hit the peak? What’s the timeframe?"
"1792","Beth Ruby: (26:06);And in terms of cases of coronavirus across the country now, last week, you said up to 10,000 people last Thursday, how many people now do you think are carrying the virus? Thank you."
"1793","Boris Johnson: (26:19);Well Beth, just on, on where we are in relation to to others, don’t forget that other countries are at different stages in their movement up the curve. And we’ve always made it very clear that the crucial thing is timeliness. Our interventions should be timely to have the maximum effect. And we think this is the right package for this particular moment, as we start to move up the curve in the way that we’ve said, and as we foreshadowed over the last, over the last couple of weeks."
"1794","Boris Johnson: (26:52);But when you come to more extreme measures, like curfews, and so on and so forth, you’ll see in some of the other countries, we’re keeping all measures under review. And particularly, obviously, people will be thinking about school closures. There is an argument device about school closures."
"1795","Boris Johnson: (27:10);We think, at the moment, on balance, it’s much better if we can keep schools open, for all sorts of reasons. But I appreciate this is again something that we need to keep under review."
"1796","Patrick Vallance: (27:24);In answer to the question about, where is London on the peak? The important thing is that London is ahead, in terms of reaching that inflection point of actually going into a faster growth phase. Clearly, the measures that have been talked about, are aimed to completely suppress that. And therefore, the peak goes much further out. So this is a sort of slower thing, with a reduced number. That’s what we’re trying to achieve."
"1797","Patrick Vallance: (27:48);Numbers? Well, the epidemic you’d expect to double every five days or so. So you can work out, there are many more, as from last week, and you can do calculations as to how many you think you may have."
"1798","Patrick Vallance: (28:02);The absolutely key thing, to reiterate what Chris Whitty has said, is testing, and ramping up our ability to test. And in that, this ability to test who has had the disease, rather than who has just got it now."
"1799","Patrick Vallance: (28:16);Both of those things are really important, to get a proper handle on this, especially this question of how many people have had it, and been asymptomatic. That is the biggest unknown worldwide, that would completely change all sorts of things, if we can get a handle on that number."
"1800","Boris Johnson: (28:34);Thanks. Robert Peston, ITV."
"1801","Robert Peston: (28:39);Couple of questions. First, your restrictions on freedom of movement, your urge to families and households to isolate, these are voluntary. They obviously can’t carry great force because they’re coming from the government. Now, in some countries, they have introduced criminal sanctions, if individuals refuse to obey what is effectively a curfew. How likely is it?"
"1802","Robert Peston: (29:08);How prepared are you to introduce criminal sanctions, if necessary? And on this issue of testing. One issue that I hear repeatedly from people in the Health Service, is they are deeply uncomfortable about being forced home if they’ve got a cough, because they’d like to continue to work. Will you, at least for Health Service workers, move fast to allow Health Service Workers to be tested, so that they at least know whether they are a risk to their patients?"
"1803","Boris Johnson: (29:46);I’ll ask Chris to deal with that, with testing. But on powers, actually, Robert, you may be amazed to know that this country already, has government already has tremendous powers in this field."
"1804","Boris Johnson: (29:56);Under an act of 1984, I think it’s open to the Secretary of State for Health to ban handshaking, if he wants to. [crosstalk 00:30:04] But I think most people would accept that we are a mature and grown up and liberal democracy, where people understand, very clearly, the advice that is being given to them."
"1805","Boris Johnson: (30:19);And I think they also understand that what we’re saying obviously helps the NHS and helps them. It helps us all as individuals, but it helps the whole community as well. I think the British public do understand that."
"1806","Chris Whitty: (30:37);In answer to the question on testing, the next level out, once we have the capacity to do this, which is where we’re really going for very fast, is exactly as you say, that healthcare and indeed other critical workers, that you can actually test them very early on in their illness, if they end up having actually the right symptoms, but in a sense, the wrong disease, or a good disease, and not coronavirus, then they will be able to go back to work, which is good for the NHS, good for society."
"1807","Chris Whitty: (31:08);If they have got it, at least you know they’ve got it, and they’re not going to get it again. And so that, for a positive or a negative, are therefore useful for the service. So there’s a very strong incentive to get this out as fast as we can practically manage it."
"1808","Boris Johnson: (31:22);Jason Gross, Daily Mail."
"1809","Jason Gross: (31:25);Obviously, Jason Gross from The Daily Mail. I mean, you’ve just announced the most extraordinary measures, saying people shouldn’t go to the pub. They shouldn’t go to cinemas, they shouldn’t go to theaters. What are you going to do to support those businesses, which are looking at the next three months and thinking, “We’re going to collapse if this happens?”"
"1810","Jason Gross: (31:42);And Sir Patrick, you’ve told us in this room on Thursday, I think, we were about four weeks behind Italy, we seem to be moving through the gaze extremely rapidly now. Are we? Were you wrong about where we were on that curve last week? Are we further up it, than the scientists thought we were?"
"1811","Boris Johnson: (31:59);Well, first of all, Jason, you’re absolutely right. This is going to be a very considerable challenge for businesses, big and small, and we’re going to make sure that we do everything we can to give them the liquidity that they need, make sure that they have the time to pay, but also, make sure in our whole fiscal policy, the way we look at our whole tax and spend system, that we give business the space in which they can come back from this, in which, and I’ve moved out at all, that we’ll be working closely with this. As I said, I don’t, we’ll be working closely with all our partners around the world, to coordinate our response."
"1812","Patrick Vallance: (32:44);In response to the question, where are we? At the early stages in outbreak, the numbers are quite small. So actually, the precision with which you can predict exactly where you are is low. And I said that I thought we were perhaps four weeks behind where Italy was. I think the new numbers suggest were maybe more like, three weeks, in terms of that."
"1813","Patrick Vallance: (33:05);And that’s really why we, and importantly, it looks like we’re on the sort of fast upswing, or just about to get there. And that’s the reason to want to come in quite quickly with these measures."
"1814","Boris Johnson: (33:17);Thanks. George Parker, Financial Times."
"1815","George Parker: (33:23);Yeah so, George Parker from the FT. You’re speaking to some of your G7 colleagues, Prime Minister, and you just mentioned the tax and spend issue. Do you think there’s a case for a general global fiscal stimulus, leaving aside specific measures to help struggling businesses? The second question, about the ventilators. How many ventilators do you think you can get into hospitals very quickly, if manufacturers help you, and don’t you regret not having started this process before?"
"1816","Boris Johnson: (33:48);First of all, on the fiscal stimulus, I think there’s a widespread agreement amongst colleagues in the G7 that we are going to need to make sure everybody has access to liquidity, and that, if we do things jointly, then I think that the global markets will understand that we’re all already operating in the same sort of fiscal framework, and I think we’ll be much more successful that way. So there’s a lot of work going on that, George."
"1817","Boris Johnson: (34:17);And on the issue of all types of medical equipment, perhaps more like, what I can say is, we’ve talked a lot in these discussions about what we’re doing to flatten the curve, to squash the sombrero, to depress the graph of the growth of the cases. And of course, that’s going on. That’s what we’re doing today."
"1818","Boris Johnson: (34:41);But there’s a parallel, a body of work which is equally energetic, which is devoted to making sure that the NHS has all the equipment that it needs. And I can tell you that huge, huge strides are being made right now on delivering ventilators, testing kits, oxygen, everything that we think we’ll need in the weeks ahead. Gordon? Gordon Rayner, please, also."
"1819","Gordon Rayner: (35:08);Thank you, Prime Minister. Gordon Rayner from The Telegraph."
"1820","Gordon Rayner: (35:13);Prime Minister and Sir Patrick, last week, Sir Patrick, in particular, was talking about herd immunity. We’ve heard today of a case in Japan, where somebody has reportedly tested positive twice. Having had it once, they’ve now got it again. Does that mean that herd immunity is now completely out of the window?"
"1821","Gordon Rayner: (35:33);And Chris Witty was saying just now, I think, that if you test people and they have had the disease, that means they can’t get it again, and they can go back to work. Are you absolutely sure about that, in the light of what we’ve heard today from Japan?"
"1822","Patrick Vallance: (35:47);So don’t-"
"1823","Boris Johnson: (35:47);Go ahead."
"1824","Patrick Vallance: (35:48);I’ll answer the second. So, the first thing, just to reiterate, the objectives, and they’ve always been the objectives, is to make absolutely sure we flatten this curve, keep it below NHS capacity limits. That’s the primary aim, and of course, to make sure that we save lives and protect the vulnerable. That’s what we need to focus on."
"1825","Patrick Vallance: (36:05);In any infectious disease, there are cases where people can catch something again. They’re rare. There’s nothing to suggest that this is a common occurrence in this disease, but we are learning as we go along. But at the moment there is nothing particularly to suggest that, and we already know, that there are some people who’ve had what are called neutralizing antibodies that have actually stopped it, so that it looks like a normal response to an infection. And there will be occasions, very rare, where somebody might get it more than once, as in any disease, any infectious disease."
"1826","Chris Whitty: (36:42);So, just to add to that, [inaudible 00:36:43], even in diseases which do not have long lasting immunity, there’s usually a short period of immunity, and that’s enough for a season and it’s an epidemic in the initial phases. So I think it’s important to differentiate between that and long lived immunity. Of course, if people don’t induce very long lived immunity, that makes the idea of a vaccine less certain. So I think we need to be aware of that, and we’ll be watching this very carefully."
"1827","Chris Whitty: (37:10);I think the final thing is, I haven’t seen the details of this report. If people have got immunosuppression or various other things, they can make this more likely, but it’s an involved area."
"1828","Boris Johnson: (37:21);And it’s always worth stressing what, I think we’ve said continuously, which is our objective, our overriding objective, in all cases, is to reduce suffering to minimize the incidence of this disease, and to save life. That’s the the absolute priority."
"1829","Patrick Vallance: (37:38);Can I just make-"
"1830","Boris Johnson: (37:38);Yeah, certainly."
"1831","Patrick Vallance: (37:39);One other point? Which is, right away from the beginning, we described four things, one of which was research. And research is unbelievably important in this, and the UK is outstanding at clinical science and the biological sciences that underpin this. And so, the research in the UK is going to be an important part of tackling this, and part of an important international effort, to make sure that we get on top of this…"
"1832","Patrick Vallance: (38:03);Part of an important international effort to make sure that we get on top of this."
"1833","Boris Johnson: (38:05);Thanks. Tom [inaudible 00:38:06]."
"1834","Tom: (38:10);Thank you, Prime Minister. First of all, can you give the nation any form of indication how long this ban on social contact will last, to prepare them? Should they prepare for a couple of weeks, couple of months, the whole year? Secondly, in terms of effect to the economy, obviously no blame intended, but clearly this has gone far further than the Chancellor might have thought last week, even when he was delivering his budget, which was predestined on 1.1% growth this year. Do you accept now the economy’s not going to grow by 1.1% and the chancellor is going to have to spend an awful lot more public money propping up businesses?"
"1835","Boris Johnson: (38:47);Yeah. Just on the timing, I think I might defer to the experts on either side of me. Just on the, on where we are with the economy, it’s perfectly obvious. The G7 conversation I was having today, everybody sees that this is going to be potentially a severe blow for the economy. Everybody can see the risks that this situation poses: the risk to demand, the risk to supply. If we get it right, and if we get the right response, and if we work together, then we can ensure that it is a short term problem because the fundamentals of the UK economy are very strong. This is unlike 2008. There isn’t a systemic problem within the economy. If we can get the disease under control in the way that we’re describing, if we can flatten that peak and it starts eventually to a decline and tells off at the crosswalk, then there’s absolutely no reason why economies worldwide should not come roaring back. It’s a very, very different category of difficulty from 2008. I think people understand that, but on the on timing, Chris?"
"1836","Chris Whitty: (40:13);We stressed right from the beginning this is going to be a marathon, not a sprint. I stressed at the beginning of the points I made that sustainability is absolutely critical here. This is not a situation where a couple of weeks and this virus is on the way. Absolutely not. People should be thinking of a minimum of weeks to months and depending how it goes, it may be longer. I think this, it is really important people realize they’re in for the long haul on this, but this is really important. If we’re to defend the ability of the NHS to treat people, if we’re to actually minimize the mortality, we’ve got to see this as a long game."
"1837","Boris Johnson: (40:49);Victoria Donald, channel four."
"1838","Victoria Donald: (40:54);Can I ask? Just a little while ago, we were told, last week indeed, that it was seven days isolation. Was it that the science moved so much, or that you made a mistake on that? Also, could you tell me about the advice on pregnant women because there have been reports, of course, of babies at the weekend being born and then testing positive, but there have been no reports of in utero transmission?"
"1839","Chris Whitty: (41:23);Shall I take the second one and Patrick take the first? In terms of pregnancy, there are reports of, well actually in the global literature at this point in time, one person who became severely ill. We’re very very early in what we know on this, the Royal College of Obstetrics and Gynecology, which is the professional body, review the evidence. It’s on their website and it was before this case was reported and it makes clear that in the very small number of pregnant women who delivered at or shortly around the time they had this, there were absolutely no complications. T."
"1840","Chris Whitty: (42:03);There are two buts to this. For many infectious diseases, there is a small but appreciable additional risk and we will not know that until a lot more women have had children. We do not know for sure. We can say reliably this is safe or there is some additional risk. Of course, this is a very new virus, so the information we have is relevant to people in the third trimester of pregnancy but not in the earliest stages of pregnancy. I’m maybe giving a long answer because this is something people get very concerned about. There is no evidence from other coronaviruses that makes us feel this is particularly dangerous in the way that for example, the Zika virus was particularly dangerous to pregnant women."
"1841","Chris Whitty: (42:46);Infections and pregnancy are not a good combination in general and that is why we’ve taken the very precautionary measure, whilst we try and find out more, to include pregnant women in the group alongside older women and people who’ve got pre-existing significant health conditions. We may in retrospect find that was overkill, but we’d rather be more cautionary now rather than the other way."
"1842","Boris Johnson: (43:10);Heather?"
"1843","Patrick Vallance: (43:11);Shall I answer the other part?"
"1844","Boris Johnson: (43:11);Sorry. Yes, forgive me. Forgive me. The seven days."
"1845","Patrick Vallance: (43:11);First thing, to really reiterate what Chris has just said. This is a brand new disease. We need to learn as we go along and that will be part of what we do. The seven days actually isn’t a change. It’s a little bit complicated and I just want to explain it. If you are ill with the symptoms of either new persistent cough or fever, you isolate yourself for seven days. If you lived on your own, that’s what you would do. That’s the advice we gave last week."
"1846","Patrick Vallance: (43:41);Now we’re saying if anybody in the family gets it or anybody in the household gets it, entire household stays together isolated for 14 days. The reason for that is the other people may pick it up over the seven days or five days period and then they’ve got seven days to have it and get better or to be asymptomatic but have it for seven days. It’s two different periods, but the principle is the same. When you’ve got symptoms, you’re seven days."
"1847","Boris Johnson: (44:10);Have you got that? It’s a difference between individual isolation and household isolation. Heather Stewart?"
"1848","Heather Stewart: (44:22);Heather Stewart from the Guardian. You talked there, Prime Minister, about giving businesses the space to deal with this crisis. I wonder whether you think you might need to take more action to give low paid households the space to deal with it. You may now have a situation where couples are both having to take 14 days off work. The budget measures relied on statutory sick paper that’s less than a hundred pounds a week. Do you think you’ll have to do more?"
"1849","Boris Johnson: (44:42);Well, Heather, we’re doing … We certainly will be bringing forward all the measures that we can. We’re lifting the living wage by a huge amount as you know, and we’re making sure that statute [inaudible 00:44:54] pay and benefits are payable as soon as, as soon as possible. The general principle that’s guiding us, because you’re totally right, we’re going to have to look after people and help them for a considerable period, is it nobody should be penalized for doing the right thing. We hope very much that people listening to this will feel that they can take the measures that we’ve outlined in the knowledge that they will be protected. Sir?"
"1850","Dennis Staunton: (45:25);Dennis Staunton from the Irish Times. I think Prime Minister, the Irish government has introduced more aggressive measures on social distancing, including the closure of schools, but the executive in Northern Ireland is following the same pace as the government in the rest of United Kingdom. Are you confident that the people in Northern Ireland are being protected from this virus as effectively as their neighbors in the South?"
"1851","Boris Johnson: (45:49);I absolutely am and we had a good discussion just now with Arlene and Michelle. Actually, if you look at what’s happening overall, the UK and Ireland are on very much the same path. Perhaps Patrick and Chris, anything you want to say about the schools issue? Any more that needs to be said?"
"1852","Patrick Vallance: (46:09);No, I think, I think we’ve covered the schools issue and I think the key thing is the social distancing actions that we’re taking around bars and restaurants and theaters and so on, which is a really important part of this, which is probably more extreme in terms of in terms of the action then."
"1853","Chris Whitty: (46:23);The one thing I think it is worth just adding to that, it’s just to reiterate the point that there that thankfully this virus seems to spare children relative to other ages."
"1854","Boris Johnson: (46:34);Dennis, we are in daily contact with our counterparts and with the teacher’s office and so on to make sure that we’re coordinating things as much as we reasonably can. Yes, sir?"
"1855","Michael: (46:53);Thank you. Prime Minister. Michael [inaudible 00:46:54] from the Herald. It’s really important that you take the public with you in whatever you do, but do you think the UK government needs to try harder to be in lockstep with the Scottish government because any perceived divergence in approach will not reassure the public that there’s a unified approach? I think it was Sir Patrick who said that London was ahead in the outbreak. Do you think, Prime Minister, that Westminster can stay up until July?"
"1856","Boris Johnson: (47:25);Well, Michael, look. A very, very good point about what’s going on with all four nations. Actually, if you’d been at the Cobra just now, it was very, very good discussion between us and all the other involved administrations. Everybody’s on the same page. Everybody can see the importance of the measures that we’ve outlined today. On your point about Westminster, we will obviously be wanting to make sure that as I say, the democracy carries on, that we protect our parliamentary institutions, but clearly those who are vulnerable and lots of members of parliament of both houses may come into that category, should receive the protections that they need."
"1857","Chris Whitty: (48:17);Prime Minister, I should just add that, just to reassure people. I speak to my counterpart Chief Medical Officers in all four nations very regularly, often several times a day. They listen in on these sage discussions and contribute under Sir Patrick, and at a technical level there’s really, really strong determination to make sure we have a unified view and understand the technical [inaudible 00:48:39] together"
"1858","Boris Johnson: (48:41);Just on the parliamentary situation, there may be more to come on this. The Speaker and all parties and the leader of the House of Commons are working together to find a way forward that that achieves that is those objectives: protecting our democracy, ensuring that our parliament stays open, but obviously also protecting the groups we need to protect. Paul?"
"1859","Paul: (49:11);Paul from HuffPost. Prime Minister, just to follow up on that last point you made, are you suggesting that all parliamentarians, MPS and peers who are over 70 should adhere to today’s announcements? I take it you are, or are they some sort of special category? More importantly, can we be a bit more precise? We’ve had a lot of vague announcements today. You said for example, people in care homes should not be visited, should not be unnecessarily visited. What does “unnecessarily” mean? Secondly, the Chief Medical Officer said that it may be weeks to months that this blanket ban on unnecessary travel and nonessential contact lasts. What do we mean by weeks to months and when we know when it’s over? Will there be an announcement by Public Health England which says, “You can all get back to work,” or what?"
"1860","Boris Johnson: (50:01);I’m going to … In terms of your first question, Paul, about parliamentarians, you can take this as a universal announcement intended for everybody. There are no exceptions. Chris, on the precision of the advice for instance, to people visiting care homes?"
"1861","Chris Whitty: (50:20);In terms of precise advice, we’ll be putting on the website a lot of precise advice. I’m not going to go through every single one, because we could spend the rest of the evening just going through one line by line. It is a really difficult area. Let me be clear that how to protect people in care homes and nursing homes is going to be one of the most challenging things for every nation on this this question because, of course, they are vulnerable and they do have to move in and out of health services from time to time and this is not going to be an easy issue anywhere."
"1862","Chris Whitty: (50:51);In terms of the precision of the timing, this will really depend on how the epidemic curve plays out over time, but we’re very confident that the minimum amount of time is going to be quite a number of weeks and it’ll then depend on how it plays out. We’ll obviously be coming back to be much more precise with people about how we feel this is going as time goes by. There’s no point to us, in a sense, putting a crystal ball in front of us and saying for sure to this number of weeks. I just wanted people to feel that this is not a two weeks and we’re done. This is a significant period of time."
"1863","Boris Johnson: (51:28);Okay. Yes?"
"1864","Harriet Line: (51:35);Harriet Line from the Press Association. What are the kinds of underlying health conditions that those people who died after contracting coronavirus had?"
"1865","Boris Johnson: (51:45);Chris?"
"1866","Chris Whitty: (51:47);Well, in every country, they’ve tended to be in a sense, what you’d expect as common significant health conditions: significant cardiovascular disease, significant respiratory disease, sometimes people who’ve had significant neurological problems. There are now quite large studies which lay this out in quite granular detail: obviously, the first experience from China where the situation is slightly different from the UK in terms of health services and risks, increasingly sadly, information from Italy. Our own experience here looking at those who sadly have died in this country completely conforms with the international experience."
"1867","Boris Johnson: (52:29);I’m going to wrap it up here. If I may. I know, I’m sorry to those of you haven’t been able to get your questions in, but as I’ve explained, there will be plenty more opportunities in the course of the next few days. Clearly, what we’re announcing today is a very substantial change in the way that we want people to live their lives, and I can’t remember anything like it in my lifetime. I don’t think it’s really been anything like it in peace time. We have to accept that it’s a very considerable psychological behavioral change that we’re asking you, we’re asking the public, the nation to do. I’ve absolutely no doubt that we can do it, that we can do it together. Everybody understands the need to do it. As I said earlier on, that our economy will eventually bounce back because the fundamentals are strong and we will, by doing the measures that we’re doing, by taking the steps that we’re taking, we will ensure that we give our NHS the space it needs and we depress the peak, as I say, in the way that our experts have described."
"1868","Boris Johnson: (53:37);I have absolutely no doubt that we will also be able in the time that we create, to move a lot further and faster in developing the treatments, the remedies, perhaps even hopefully the vaccines that will enable us to deal with this new coronavirus. Thank you all very much for your patience. I hope everybody has felt that they understood what we’re saying and I’ll see you all tomorrow. Thank you."
"1869","Boris Johnson: (00:00);I want to tell you where we got to in our national fight back against the coronavirus. Today, the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies met to discuss the latest evidence on the spread of the virus and the effects of the measures we have already taken to slow its spread. And Patrick is going to update us in a second about that. I want to repeat that everyone, everyone must follow the advice to protect themselves and their families, but also more importantly to protect the wider public. So stay at home for seven days if you think you have the symptoms. Remember, the two key symptoms are high temperature, a continuous new cough. Whole household to stay at home for 14 days if one member of that household thinks that he, she has the symptoms. Avoid all unnecessary gatherings, pubs, clubs, bars, restaurants, theaters and so on."
"1870","Boris Johnson: (01:04);Work from home if you can. Wash your hands. And we’ve already announced in the last few days, we will massively scale up our testing capacity in the weeks ahead so that we hit 25,000 tests a day. Huge public information campaign is being rolled out so people get all the information they need, we need to protect ourselves and others. We’re asking retired healthcare professionals to come back and help us cope, help the NHS to cope with this unprecedented challenge. And we will continue, as we have from the beginning, to do the right thing at the right time and to follow the best scientific advice. And we come today to the key issue of schools, where we’ve been consistently advised that there is an important trade off. And so far the judgment of our advisors has been that closing schools is actually of limited value in slowing the spread of the epidemic."
"1871","Boris Johnson: (02:05);And that’s partly because counterintuitively, schools are actually very safe environments and in this disease and this epidemic, children and young people are much less vulnerable. And hitherto, the advice has been that we should keep schools open if possible in order to reduce the pressure on the NHS and on normal other public services. But I think you’ll agree that I’ve always been very clear that this is a balanced judgment and one that we’ve kept under constant review. So looking at the curve of the disease, and looking at why we are now, we think now that we must apply downward pressure, further downward pressure on that upward curve by closing the school. So I can announce today, and Gavin Williamson is making a statement now in the House of Commons that after schools shut their gates from Friday afternoon, they will remain closed for most pupils, so the vast majority of pupils, until further notice."
"1872","Boris Johnson: (03:15);And I’ll come to … and I’ll explain what I mean by the vast majority of pupils. The objective is to slow the spread of the virus. And as I say, we judge that this is the right moment to do that. But of course, as I’ve always said, we also need to keep the NHS going and to treat the rising number of cases. So we need health workers who are also parents to continue to go to work and we need other critical workers with children to keep doing their jobs too, from police officers who are keeping us safe to the supermarket delivery drivers, social care workers who look after the elderly and who are so vital. We’ll be sending out more details shortly about who we mean in these groups."
"1873","Boris Johnson: (04:03);So we therefore need schools to make provision for the children of these key workers who would otherwise be forced to stay home. And they will also need to look after the most vulnerable children. This will mean that there’ll be of course far fewer children in the schools and that will help us to slow the spread of the disease. And these measures are crucial to make sure that the … as I say, the critical parts of the economy keep functioning and public services keep functioning."
"1874","Boris Johnson: (04:38);So we’re simultaneously asking nurseries and private schools to do the same. And we’re providing financial support where it’s needed. We’re making provisions to supply meals and vouchers for children eligible for free school meals. And while some schools are already doing this, I want to make it clear that we will reimburse the cost. And of course, this does mean that exams will not take places planned in May and June, though we will make sure that peoples get the qualifications they need and deserve for their academic career."
"1875","Boris Johnson: (05:20);Now I know that the steps will not be easy for parents or for teachers, and for many parents this will be frustrating and it will make it harder for them to go out to work. And of course that’s one of the reasons that we haven’t wanted to go ahead. And that’s why we are now working on further measures to ensure that we support not just businesses but also individuals and their families to keep our economy going as Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, outlined yesterday."
"1876","Boris Johnson: (05:54);I also need to remind parents, as we’ve already advised, that children should not be left with older grandparents or older relatives who may be particularly vulnerable and fall into some of the vulnerable groups. And I want to … I know that’s going to be difficult too, and I want to thank families for their sacrifice at this difficult time. And I want to thank the whole country for the efforts that people are making to comply with these measures."
"1877","Boris Johnson: (06:20);I particularly want to thank teachers, head teachers, all the support staff who keep schools going who are going to be able to make these exceptional arrangements work for the benefit of us all. By looking after the children of key workers, they will be a critical part of our fight back against coronavirus. And as I’ve said, we will take the right steps at the right time guided by the signs. We believe that the steps we’ve already taken, together with those I’m announcing today, are already slowing the spread of the disease, but we will not hesitate to go further and faster in the days and weeks ahead and we will do whatever it takes so that we beat it together. And I’m now going to pass I think to Patrick to give an update from SAGE’s point of view. Thank you."
"1878","Patrick Vallance: (07:19);Overriding consideration, as always, save lives, protect the most vulnerable people from this illness. The vast majority of people have a mild illness but some get a very severe illness. The measures that were announced a couple of days ago, we already know are taking effect in terms of behavior, so we can see that already, that people are actually taking that very seriously and it made a difference and that’s really important to carry on with that. But the thing we must protect in order to achieve those aims of saving lives and protecting people is to make sure that the NHS intensive care capacity and the ventilator capacity is not breached. That’s what we need to keep looking at and making sure we do not get to a position where that’s breached."
"1879","Patrick Vallance: (08:06);As this moves fast, and I alluded to this on Monday, more measures will be needed to make sure that happens. And right from the beginning, we said schools are one of the things you can do, but they’re less important than some of the others that have been taken. But we now think we’re at a stage where this extra bit is an important measure to make sure we stay under that critical protecting NHS, ICU, and ventilator capacity. So that’s the reason for now saying that this should go ahead at this time."
"1880","Patrick Vallance: (08:38);It’s important to stress, and this is really critical, it’s not because schools are dangerous places for children. They’re not. Children have a very mild or asymptomatic version of this disease in many cases. So they are the least at risk. It’s also not a dangerous place for teachers. The reason for this is because of the effect it can have just to knock down further the transmission … put some delay into the system, put some breaks into the system of the transmission of this disease to bring it down to protect those people who might get the much more serious version and end up in intensive care or on a ventilator."
"1881","Patrick Vallance: (09:22);So that’s the reason. Now is the important time to do it. It’s not instead of, and it can’t supplement the other measures. The other measures are crucially important and we all have our part to play to make sure that we make those measures as effective as possible to try to drive this right down and make sure we stay below that critical threshold. Thank you."
"1882","Boris Johnson: (09:44);Thanks so much, Patrick. Jenney, from your point of view."
"1883","Jenney Harries: (09:47);So I think nothing very much further to add to those points. So exactly as Patrick explained, this is not a change in the scientific position, which we’ve always taken forward. It is very much a practical response at a critical time as both the Prime Minister and Sir Patrick has indicated, but very happy to …"
"1884","Jenney Harries: (10:03);… as both the Prime Minister and Sir Patrick has indicated, but very happy to answer any clinical questions that come up."
"1885","Boris Johnson: (10:06);Okay, excellent. Well, thank you very much, Jenney. Let’s go straight to to you for your questions on this. Beth Rigby, Sky News."
"1886","Beth Rigby: (10:17);Thank you. Prime Minister, just in terms of further measures, a third of the deaths are now in the capital of London. Buses are still full, the tubes are full, bars are full. London is not listening to your advice. You’ve shot the schools today. When will we see wider enforcement to shut down London properly? And if I may, just on the antibodies test. After quite difficult days and frightening news, something a bit more encouraging today, you talked about getting closer to an antibodies test to tell us whether people have had the virus. When will it be ready, and what sort of impact could it have? Could it be a game changer in helping us manage this disease and keeping our emergency services running? Thank you."
"1887","Boris Johnson: (11:05);Yeah. Well Beth, thank you very much. And look, we’ve always said that we’re going to do the right measures at the right time. That’s what we’ve done and actually I think a lot of people are making a real heroic effort to comply with the advice that we’ve given. But as I said tonight and in past few days, we keep everything under continuous review and we will not hesitate to bring forward further and faster measures where we think that is necessary. But on the antibodies…"
"1888","Patrick Vallance: (11:38);So two types of tests are important. The test that say have you got the active virus and that’s being rapidly scaled up by Public Health England and that’s [inaudible 00:01:47] actively got it at the moment. The second one as you allude to is the antibody test, which tells you whether you’ve had it and whether you’ve now got antibodies against it and that’s progressing very fast. Public Health England are looking at this today and they’ve got a test which they’ve got in house that they’re going and we’re looking at ways to get a much more widespread version of that out. It is a game changer and the reason it’s a game changer is that it allows you to understand the proportion of the asymptomatic population. Who’s had this disease but hasn’t had symptoms that are in any way significant? And we don’t have that number accurately for anywhere in the world at the moment. So if we can get that number, it starts to really help. In going forward, it’s going to be critically important to be able to monitor this disease well because only by being able to monitor it can we start relaxing measures again, start understanding what the effect of taking things off again at some point is. So this is all part of a critical ability to manage this as an agile way going forward."
"1889","Boris Johnson: (12:53);Jenney, I think you had a little on that as well."
"1890","Jenney Harries: (12:56);Well, just to say that I think exactly as Sir Patrick has said,it is actually not just our health workforce, it’s our care workforce as well. And the other measures that we’ve introduced particularly to protect the vulnerable when we have a matched workforce, if you like, where we’re clearly aware of their antibody status, whether they have had the disease and are therefore safe to work with our vulnerable group, that increases our opportunities around our interventions."
"1891","Boris Johnson: (13:19);And everybody can see the immense advantages. The thing about this disease, it’s an invisible enemy and we don’t know who’s transmitting it, but the great thing about having a test to see whether you’ve had it or not is suddenly a green light goes on above your head. You can go back to work safe and confident in the knowledge that you’re most unlikely to get it again. So from an economic point of view, from a social point of view, as Sir Patrick says, it really could be a game changer. It’s important not to get ahead of ourselves. We’re not there. We’re not there yet. But you really can see the potential of that advance, which is, as I say, coming down the track. Let’s go to Laura Kuenssberg from the BBC."
"1892","Laura Kuenssberg: (14:02);Thank you very much, Prime Minister. You were very eager to avoid closing schools if you possibly could, but now you have taken that decision. Families will wonder maybe more than anything else tonight how long these closures might last. Can you give us any indication? The Scottish government has suggested maybe six months until the summer holidays. And to the medics, if I may, you have touched on this, Sir Patrick, but in the simplest clearest of terms, if schools are to be closed to slow the spread, why are they safe places for any child or any member of staff?"
"1893","Boris Johnson: (14:36);Well, on the duration, Laura, obviously we’re going to try to keep it to an absolute minimum as you can imagine, to keep it [inaudible 00:14:44] and get things going as fast as we can. But our judgment right now is that this is the moment to provide further downward pressure, as I say, on the upwards trajectory of the virus by taking that step for epidemiological reasons alone whilst doing what we can, as I said, to protect our ability to keep the NHS going by delivering care and education for key workers. We think this is the right moment to do it. I wish I could give you the answer about how long it will be, Laura, but we’ve got to do it right now."
"1894","Patrick Vallance: (15:22);So two sets of measures, one are about making sure all of us are protected, which is about reducing transmission. Second is about protecting those people most at risk. This falls into the category of the first. It’s about making sure that we stop transmission, reduce transmission, and children are not getting a serious form of this illness. They are very mild, often asymptomatic, and therefore don’t have a big risk around each other. They also may not spread it as much. We don’t know that yet. We don’t know the exact spread of this. It’s not like influenza. That seems to be clearer, but we don’t know exactly how that works, so this is about a measure to protect all of us. It’s not a measure because there’s some specific risk to children."
"1895","Boris Johnson: (16:10);Thanks. Jenney, anything you want to add on?"
"1896","Jenney Harries: (16:12);Just to say that obviously the whole approach is to reduce the social contact throughout society and we have taken the measures which maximize the impact to health and our safety whilst minimizing those to the way that we live. This measure moves that on a small amount as we’ve said, but is, as Sir Patrick said, this not to do with the the safety of the children. It’s simply about a background level of the numbers of social contacts that we have."
"1897","Boris Johnson: (16:41);Thanks. Shehab Khan, ITV."
"1898","Shehab Khan: (16:43);Prime Minister, you mentioned that exams will now be canceled. There will be plenty of students who are about and preparing to take their GCSEs and A-levels. Their college, six form places, their university places and job offers will be contingent on those exams. What measures are you taking on that? Also, if I may, you mentioned you want to increase the number of tests to 25,000 a day. Will people still need to go to hospital to take those tests especially if they’re not showing symptoms? What do you advise people to do?"
"1899","Boris Johnson: (17:14);Okay. Well, Shehab, thank you very much. First of all, on exams and on the ambitions, the hopes of students, pupils in our schools, I totally understand people’s frustrations, the frustrations of parents who are going to feel now that they have to to stay at home. And as I said earlier, we’re going to make sure that we look after workers of all kinds. But when it comes to kids and their exam qualifications, we will make sure that they are not impeded, their progress is not impeded as a result of the decisions we’re having to take now about their schools. So we will make sure that in time they get the qualifications they need. I don’t want to go in detail about when and how those qualifications will be administered, but it will be done fairly and in order to protect their interests."
"1900","Patrick Vallance: (18:03);Do-"
"1901","Boris Johnson: (18:04);On-"
"1902","Patrick Vallance: (18:04);On testing?"
"1903","Boris Johnson: (18:05);I think that’s a very good question about where … Shehab asked about where the testing would take place and I mean I think there’s a lot of progress we’re going to be making on that."
"1904","Patrick Vallance: (18:16);There’s a lot of … I mean, at the moment the testing is about people in hospital with respiratory illness, people in intensive care units. It’s about outbreaks in an area and it’s about making sure that we can test those who are most vulnerable or need particular protection. Now as you get more tests, of course you can roll out more people under those categories. And it’s important that we don’t end up with everyone coming to a hospital to be tested for all the reasons we’ve talked about before. So as the increase in capacity comes on line, there will be ways of testing which don’t require people to go to hospital. I don’t know, Jenney, if you want to say anything more about that."
"1905","Jenney Harries: (18:54);Yeah, so obviously that reflects I think the position that we’re in at the moment. We’ve steeped up our current testing capacity moving towards 25,000 today. And another group in that is very much as we start putting on the question that Beth raised earlier is about actually acknowledging that we need to retain and know that we are using safe clinical staff so that’s another group … Excuse me. But as we go forward we will be very much have an ambition to have some sort of home-based test for the very reason which has been described here, which is we don’t want potentially infectious people arriving in hospitals, but we recognize that the public and particularly our key workers want to understand their health status so that they can get back to normal activities. So a lot of work on that ongoing and I think huge progress made in the last few weeks."
"1906","Boris Johnson: (19:45);Thanks. I got a Jim Picard down here. Is Jim Picard here? Thank you. Jim."
"1907","Jim Picard: (19:50);Prime Minister, you’ve got the emergency legislation coming out tomorrow and it’s reported that there’s a plan to lift the current cap on how much money you can invest in struggling industries, currently at 12 billion pounds. Is that the case? And does that signal-"
"1908","Jim Picard: (20:03);… near 12 billion pounds. Is that the case and does that signal that there’s going to be another multi billion pound investment in industries such as airlines?"
"1909","Boris Johnson: (20:09);Well, Jim, thanks very much. As the chancellor said yesterday, we’re going to, he outlined a big package of 330 billion pounds by which the government will stand behind companies as they go through this tough time, stand behind their lenders, make sure that we keep their lenders going, and there is always a big package, as you know, about 20 billion to support business directly, in cash terms, 25 thousand grants for SMEs, 10 thousand for the smallest businesses, but your point is a good one and we will continue to look at the steps that may be necessary to support good companies that are now facing difficulties through no fault of their own, and we certainly will be doing whatever it takes to help those companies through tough times, because I’m absolutely convinced that the UK economy will come back, will come back very strongly, and when it does we want those companies to be in the best possible position to take advantage."
"1910","Boris Johnson: (21:28);Heather Stewart, The Guardian."
"1911","Heather Stewart: (21:30);Hello, Heather Stewart from The Guardian."
"1912","Heather Stewart: (21:34);There will be thousands of workers who will have been laid off within hours and days of your Monday announcement who worked in the pubs in the gyms and the theaters that you’ve told people to stay away from. Many of those will be in rented accommodation and they will probably have been listening to the package yesterday from which [inaudible 00:21:51] to hear if there might be some help? I’m wondering what on Earth to say to their landlords about the fact that they might not be able to make this months or next months rent. Can you do something more for them?"
"1913","Boris Johnson: (21:59);Absolutely. Thanks, Heather, and as I said in the House this morning, we will be bringing forward legislation which will help renters, prevent them from suffering no fault eviction, that kind of thing. We will want to protect people who face difficulties, as I said, through no fault of their own. We can not penalize people for doing the right thing, nor can we penalize people when you have an economic upset that is the direct result of the governments actions, the government’s advice, which are intended to protect the public. Everybody who experiences that kind of dislocation, that kind of disruption is entitled, as I said yesterday, to protection and support, and that’s what we will provide."
"1914","Boris Johnson: (22:51);Wow, you’ve got a lot of questions here. Okay, Tom?"
"1915","Tom: (22:56);Tom [inaudible 00:00:22:55]. Thank you, Prime Minister. On the closing of the schools, can you say is this a mandatory thing you are doing? Are they-"
"1916","Boris Johnson: (23:02);Yeah."
"1917","Tom: (23:02);Will they be required by law to do this, and what about the schools that have already closed, will they be required to reopen if, to teach the key workers you just [crosstalk 00:23:11]?"
"1918","Boris Johnson: (23:10);Yes, [crosstalk 00:23:13]."
"1919","Tom: (23:11);I’m very sorry, a very, very quick secondary one. The Brexit transition period, the country clearly wants you to focus on dealing with the credit crisis, what you are doing, will you rule out extending the transition period here now or might that be something you want to consider in the future?"
"1920","Boris Johnson: (23:27);Tom, first of all on schools, clearly the government is, will be closing the schools, and we have the power to do that. When it comes to private schools, we have, I believe we have the same powers. Obviously, we will work to ensure that [inaudible 00:23:48] and so forth are properly compensated. And as for the provision for … And nurseries are properly compensated. As for the provision for the vulnerable and for the key workers in the schools that have already closed, we will work to ensure that they, where necessary, they provide those facilities as well as other schools."
"1921","Boris Johnson: (24:12);I think what you possible need to imagine is that as we go down the track, since there will only be a minority, a small minority of pupils going forward in the future who are being continuously looked after by schools, there may be an overall reduction in the number of schools who are providing any type of service at all, if you see what I’m saying? There may be some rationalization so that not every school is providing the service for key workers and for the vulnerable, if you see what, but that’s, on Monday what we want, if possible, is for all children in those sectors still to go to their schools. If you’re in those groups, to, still to go to their schools, if you see what I’m saying. So on Monday, just to clarify that, it’s important that children of key workers, pupils of key worker parents, and we’ll be identifying those groups, we’ll be sending out more in, very, very shortly, those pupils should turn up to their school, and vulnerable kids, vulnerable pupils as well. I hope that’s clear."
"1922","Boris Johnson: (25:28);And you had another question, what was it about?"
"1923","Tom: (25:30);[crosstalk 00:25:33]-"
"1924","Boris Johnson: (25:31);It was another subject, what was it? It was a subject that’s been banished, it’s been done."
"1925","Tom: (25:35);[crosstalk 00:25:36]-"
"1926","Boris Johnson: (25:37);It’s been, it’s been … I feel, it’s not a subject that’s being regularly discussed, I can tell you in Downey Street at the moment, and we’re getting on with, there are, legislation, there’s legislation in place that I have no intention of changing."
"1927","Boris Johnson: (25:56);Hugo Guy from inews."
"1928","Hugo Guy: (26:00);Thank you, Prime Minister. Following on from Beth’s question, is there any intention to bring in legal restrictions on when, where or how people can travel around, whether that’s specifically in London or more broadly?"
"1929","Boris Johnson: (26:16);Well, thanks Hugo. We live in a land of liberty, as you know, and it’s one of the great features of our lives that we don’t tend to impose those sorts of restrictions on people in this country, but I have to tell you we will rule nothing out, and we will certainly wish to consider bringing forward further and faster measures where that is necessary to suppress the peak of the epidemic, to protect our NHS, to minimize casualties and to minimize suffering. That is our objective."
"1930","Boris Johnson: (26:54);Anyone? I don’t know. Okay, thank you. Okay, this is the last question I’m afraid for this round, folks, but there are going to be more of these sessions, as you know. So the last question goes to Charlotte Ivers of Talk Radio."
"1931","Charlotte Ivers: (27:08);Thank you, Prime Minister. Sir Patrick, it appears people are quite reluctant to follow this advice, as Beth mentioned earlier. Can I ask if you’re modeling of the results takes that into account? And secondly, Prime Minister, how would you describe the people who aren’t taking the advice on social distancing? Are they being immoral?"
"1932","Boris Johnson: (27:28);No. Well, I’ll ask Patrick to answer first, but, go."
"1933","Patrick Vallance: (27:32);So the modeling does take into account that not everyone’s going to follow it, but a very high proportion need to, and that means we all need to really focus on this, because the moment we say “Well, it’s not for me, it’s for somebody else” and the compliance of this goes down, the less effective it’s going to be, and the reason this is important, I can’t stress this enough, is to make sure that the NHS ICU capacity is kept in a way that we don’t breach it and the ventilators are available to do this. So when we don’t adhere to this, we’re actually putting lots of people at risk. We’re putting those sickest patients at risk, and so it’s crucial that this isn’t taken as soft advice, but is taken as a really clear instruction to do this if we’re going to make sure that we protect the lives of others."
"1934","Boris Johnson: (28:27);Anything you want to say on that?"
"1935","Boris Johnson: (28:28);Well look, I just want, I want to wrap up by answering your question, because it’s a very profound and important question, Charlotte, and of course people must take their own decisions, and I’m a believer, as I said, in freedom, but there’s been absolutely no doubt that these are very, very important choices that we’re now making in our daily lives, and the more closely and the more strictly, the more ruthlessly we can enforce upon ourselves and our families the advice that we’re getting about avoiding unnecessary gatherings, about staying at home when we have symptoms, all that advice, which is good advice, then the better we will be able to protect our NHS, the fewer deaths we will have, and the less suffering there will be in the UK population, and the faster we will get through this and the better we will bounce back eventually. So it is a very, very clear choice for people. This is strong, strong advice, and I say, and to get back to Beth’s initial question, absolutely, we do not rule out, because it would be quite wrong to do so, we do not rule out taking further and faster measures in due course."
"1936","Boris Johnson: (29:49);Thank you all very much for coming along this evening. Thank you."
